 27Q062 School Name: P.S. 062 CHESTER PARK Principal: ANGELA O'DOWD   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Chester Park School 342700010062 Pre-K to Grade 5 School Number (DBN): 27Q062 97-25 108 Street, South Richmond Hill, New York 11419 718-286-4460 Phone Number: 718-286-4465 Fax: Angela O’Dowd aodowd2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Angela O’Dowd Laura Snider Susan Reardon Michael Rand KatyBarbecho N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Mary Barton Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd, Queens, New York JAmbert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5800 Phone Number: 718-642-5770 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director:   82-01 Rockaway, Blvd, Ozone Park, New York 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-281-3259 Phone Number: 646-522-7133 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Angela O’Dowd Laura Snider Susan Reardon N/A KatyBarbecho N/A N/A Naomi Devore MIchaelRand Alison Roche BibiZabar *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Chair/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Andrea Wagner Member/Teacher Gina Dell MohamedAkkouh Karla Villalobo KatyBarbecho ArcangelCruz Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement We will prepare students for their future in a RICH school environment Resourceful - We find quick and clever ways to overcome difficulties   Innovative - We come up with new ideas and inventions Collaborative - We work effectively with others Hopeful - We feel inspired about our likelihood to succeed in the future 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 62 is a Title 1 barrier-free School of 905 students from Pre-K to Grade 5. 61% of students identify as Asian (India) (many from this group are from Guyana), 26.2% are Hispanic, 3.3% are Black, 7% are American Indian and 2% are White. The two main languages spoken at our school are Punjabi and Spanish. 20% of students (187) are English Language Learners. Of all the English Language Learners, 10% of students (15) also have an Individualized Education Plan (IEP). English as a New Language Services are provided in both a stand-alone and integrated approach. We have several teachers and paraprofessionals who speak the main languages of our student population (Punjabi, Spanish, Hindi, Urdu, Bengali, and Arabic) and work to bridge the gap for students (during the period of transition) from the native language. We avail of current technologies (Talk & Listen - Audio Resource Group) to assist in translations for parents. In all 10.14% (95) of students have an IEP and those students are serviced in the following ways ● 4 self-contained classes (K/1 Bridge, 1/2 Bridge, 3/4 Bridge and Grade 5) ● 7 ICT classes (K-5) ● pull out providers for related services and SETSS We work hard to maintain a 95% attendance rate especially with so many immigrant families who often return to their country of origin for extended periods of time. Magnet School for Computer Science and Innovation - Unique Characteristics and Special Initiatives for 2018-2019  We will refine and implement a new math curriculum focused on deeper understanding of the major clusters from Common Core Standards along with a focus on student discourse. This will happen with the assistance of an upper school and lower school Consultant, one from Metamorphosis and one from Generation Ready. The curriculum will include Depth of Knowledge Tasks 1, 2, 3 and some 4's.  We will continue to use Mastery Connect to align our practices to QR indicators 4.1 and 2.2 and ensuring that all teachers are creating and using formative assessments effectively to drive instruction. The focus this year will be for teacher teams to focus on a specific target for a Power Standard each in Reading, Writing and Math and monitor student progress towards it.  We will continue to evolve the computer science curriculum in alignment with the New York City Computer Science for All initiative and share best practices as a New York City Showcase school. In addition, one technology teacher will co-teach with pre-K and kindergarten classroom teachers as part of a long term plan to integrate CS across the school and curriculum. We will also partner with SepJr and one classroom teacher on each grade will attend summer and Saturday workshops to learn more about coding practices.  The Play Lab will be staffed by a full time Magnet Resource Specialist in order to build capacity around our theme of innovation. This teacher will liaise with Magnet Partnerships, The Hall of Science and the Beam Institute. He will work alongside classroom teachers as they learn to use new tools, improve their Makerspace and innovate their PBL units.  We will continue to develop, refine and implement PBL units, incorporating computer science and innovation as part of a longer term plan to have a fully integrated curriculum. These units will reflect Next Generation 0  Science Standards. As part of this process, a consultant from the Hall of Science will provide weekly PD for teachers on Mondays as well as in class coaching on the use of a variety of tools and materials. Innovation and Computational Thinking During the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue to act as a Showcase School for New York City for the third consecutive year. This will also be our third year as a Magnet School for Computer Science and Innovation. As part of this Federal Magnet grant, we partnered with the Hall of Science to integrate the Engineering Design Process across all classrooms and to build strong model classrooms. We also continued our ongoing work to provide all students with computer science and robotics classes from Kindergarten to Grade 5. As a result of these efforts, we have considerably changed the mindset of students and teachers around the themes of innovation and computational thinking. We also fully equipped a Play Lab and classroom Makerspaces with the necessary resources to continue the work for the next two years. Some examples of the mindset shift have been:- the expansion in the number of teachers interested in 3D printing, a group of seven teachers participating in Sepjr Saturday workshops, a teacher who visited another Showcase School and started a hydroponics and aquaponics studio. This work will continue for the next school year expanding the Algebra for All philosophy schoolwide including departmentalization of 4th grade. Mathematics Instruction/Curriculum and Algebra for All During the 2017-2018 school year, we hired two math consultants from Metamorphosis and Generation Ready, 20-30 days each, to improve math practices, understanding of content and student discourse across the school. In order to build capacity, we identified a lead teacher on each grade to work with the consultants to develop a framework and a complete unit for the next school year. This upcoming school year District 27 has been identified as an Algebra for All District and there will be ongoing support to schools including professional development opportunities. The two math consultants (familiar to teachers) will also be needed in the 2018-2019 school year in order to continue the work of refining conceptual math units and on site coaching to implement curriculum. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. There is an immigrant population of English speaking students from Guyana and Trinidad who often come to our school with deficits of more than one year behind grade level in literacy and math. They need to be evaluated and targeted for the specific literacy and math standards that are lacking. These include phonics, phonemic awareness, fluency, vocabulary and comprehension skills as well as math practices and fluencies. These students then receive RTI tier II and III intervention. There are approximately 100 students with IEP's with various classifications and are serviced in seven integrated co-teaching classes as well as three self-contained 12:1:1 classes. Their specific needs are identified on IEP's and movement to least restrictive environments are discussed at regular PPT and SIT meetings. There are 187 students identified for ENL services across the school with home languages in Punjabi, Spanish, Hindi, Arabic, Bengali. Urdu and Mandarin. The parent preferences are to service students in a push in pull out ENL program serviced by three full time licensed ELL teachers. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 1  During the 2018-2019 we would like to continue to focus on Rigorous Instruction alongside Student Engagement techniques, returning to our foundational beliefs about how students learn best and better assimilating new resources to the Five Pillar concept. We will focus on how best to engage students in their own learning, shifting the teacher role to one of facilitator and promoting independence through the use of blended learning, independent reading and student leaders. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q062 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 944 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 29 29 39 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 18 18 39 39 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 69.0% % Attendance Rate 66.9% % Reduced Lunch 15.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 8.5% 25.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.26 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 51.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 91% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 58 58 39 94.1% 1.1% 11.0% 3.5% 59.7% 9.1% 6 2% 7.8 52.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of school based spreadsheets (Fountas and Pinnell Levels) for the end of the school year 2017-2018, indicates that 46% of Kindergarten students, 56% of 1st grades students and 47% of second grade students were at or above grade level. Teachers have worked in teams and inquiry cycles to monitor student data by individual standards using the platform Mastery Connect. Their collaborative work and protocols have been celebrated in both the Quality Review and in a grant with Teaching Matters. This year we would like to ensure that all students are challenged and supported in their literacy practices and that teachers use the 'Plan-Do-Check-Act' Assessment Cycle' to ensure that all students are making the required progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of a systematic approach to guided reading instruction, there will be an increase from 49% to 60% in the percentage of students in Grades K-2 reading on or above grade level as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will engage in a range of balanced literacy activities from the Five Pillars of Literacy Plus Writing (phonics, phonemic awareness, fluency, comprehension and vocabulary) during a 135 minute literacy block. They will use school created PBL units aligned to literacy, science and social studies standards. In addition, supplemental programs such as , Jolly Phonics and Jolly Grammar, IReady, Myon Reader, and independent and Guided Reading books will be used. Teachers will use a variety of customized scaffolds for English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. A before and after-school program will be established for targeted ELL's (using an Annual Measurable Achievement Objectives tool). Moby Max will be used as one of the progress monitoring and resource tool for ELL's and SWD's. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students September 2018 to June 2019 Teachers, Administrators Students September 2018 to June 2019 Teachers and Administrators Parents will be informed about student attendance, grades and contact information in one of ten languages on a computer, phone or tablet using a new app NYC Schools Account. Teachers will use the SchoolCNXT App to communicate with parents. Parents The online assessment tool Mastery Connect will be used to monitor and analyze student's mastery of individual standards. Students September 2018 to June 2019 Teachers and Administrators September 2018 to June 2019 Teachers and Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. A beginning of the year 'Meet the Staff' evening will be held for parents to hear and contributing to curriculum overviews and school expectations. The vision and mission along with assessment policy will be shared with parents via a Google Slideshow shared with all classrooms. Unit overviews will be distributed to parents and celebrations will be held every six to eight weeks and parents will be invited. Families will be invited on trips associated with each unit (classroom teachers). Family volunteers will be invited to read in the classroom. Parents will receive overviews of units at the beginning of each cycle (teachers and Administrators). Facebook, Twitter and a school website will be updated regularly. Student led conferences will be conducted regularly on Parent Engagement Tuesdays. 5  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Cost of Mastery Connect Cost of teacher and supervisor per session for Title III Afterschool program Cost of teachers and supervisor per session for Afterschool programs and February Break Cost of Jolly Phonics, guided reading and independent books Cost of subscriptions to Reading A-Z, PebbleGo, Brainpop, Myon Reader, MobyMax, Iready. Cost of computers and ipads for blended learning for students and Mastery Connect monitoring for teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 55% of students in grades K-2 will be on or above grade level as measured by Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The School Quality Guide for 2017-2018 indicates that 88% of teachers say that adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior, and feelings. In an effort to build upon this strength and provide teachers with a research based program that aligned with our school goals of improving upon literacy learning as well as collaboration, the school leadership team approved Sanford Harmony's curriculum which provides for teacher professional development and literacy based strategies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will ensure that 100% of students will build valuable social and emotional skills as measured by an end of year teacher survey. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Sanford Harmony Program will be used weekly by all teachers. Students All teachers will use a kit with books, cards, lesson plans and online support specific to grades K-2 and 3-5. Lessons are multi-sensory and involve strategies that meet the needs of both ELL and Special Needs Students. The ELL team and Special Education team will make more specific adaptations to the curriculum on a monthly basis. Students The Dean and Guidance Counselors will provide workshops for parents to assist them with learning strategies and activities from the Sanford Harmony program. Parents and Families School leaders will monitor and evaluate the impact of the program by observing lessons and providing feedback to teachers specifically in the areas of 2A and 2D of Danielson. Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Administrators Teachers Administrators Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Administrators Teachers Administrators How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops on the five CASEL competencies and aligned Sanford Harmony's strategies will be conducted by the Dean and Guidance Counsellor. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Sanford Harmony Curriculum, Two Workshops for Parents to be conducted by the Guidance Counselor and the Dean during parent engagement Tuesdays. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 8  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will administer a mid-year impact survey to teachers to ensure that 100% of students are using self management strategies (behaving when the teacher is not watching and paying attention in class). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Created Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our strengths in this area are as follows:  The New York City School Survey identified peer collaboration as 96% positive.  The Quality Review for 2014-2015 identified 4.2 'How well do teachers work with each other?' as Well Developed.  Teacher Teams are advancing their practices using Mastery Connect as a tool to monitor student progress towards mastery of individual standards.  Teacher leaders have received extensive training from Teaching Matters and a literacy consultant to lead meetings and use team protocols effectively.  As a Magnet School for Computer Science and Innovation, all teachers have received professional development from the New York Hall of Science during the 2017-2018 school year. Our needs are as follows:   School leaders need to identify highly effective practices in different competencies of the Danielson Framework in order to share best practices across the school community. Four new teachers will need to learn curriculum, pedagogy, team protocols and assessment practices specific to our school in order to actively participate in grade meetings.  Math consultants are needed to help teachers implement new curriculum (tasks, games, assessments and homework.)  Teacher leaders identified the need to adapt protocols so that formative assessment plays an important role in the planning and revision cycle.  Pre-K and Kindergarten teachers will collaborate with a technology teacher in order to develop their own individual computer science skills within their instruction. Surveys will provide feedback about their experience. Schedules will need to reflect this practice and a .5 position will be funded through the Magnet program.  Teachers will meet weekly as a grade to collaborate on both literacy and math curriculum and practice.  A facilitator from each grade will meet every other week to engage in vertical conversations about data and pedagogy.  Monthly articulation meetings will be scheduled between ESL teachers/Cluster teachers and classroom teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 0  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will engage in relevant and quality professional development related to the Magnet theme of Computer Science and Innovation and results will be measured by a teacher satisfaction survey. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development will be provided from a variety of sources, including, Teaching Matters, N.Y.C. Arts Department, NYCDOE District Level PD, Algebra for All Initiative, New York Hall of Science, Generation Ready, Beam Center, Metamorphosis and Showcase Schools. Peer inter-visitations will be scheduled and best practices shared across school and district. Special needs teachers will meet together monthly in order to share effective strategies. ELL teachers will meet weekly to analyze progress and share best strategies with classroom teachers via a bimonthly newsletter. Teachers, Paraprofessionals, and Students September 2018 to June 2019 Teachers, Consultant, and Administrators Teachers Paraprofessionals, and Students September 2018 to June 2019 Teachers and Administrators Quality professional development sessions on family engagement will be provided at least two times during the year. Parents, Teachers, and Students September 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers and Administrators Professional development will be designed to support the teacher's individual goals discussed at the Initial Planning Conferences. Teachers, paraprofessionals and students September 2018 to June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, paraprofessionals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be held by individual and groups of teachers throughout the school year in order to promote and improve home-school connections through the use of different technologies. Interactive boards will be set up in the front lobby and kindergarten wing of the school in order to promote this discussion. In addition, a family welcome center will be established in the main lobby and Pre-K /Kindergarten area. A title I meeting will be conducted by the principal to explain how funds are used for both professional development and parent engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2  ● Title I Family Engagement Magnet Grant funds ● Per session hours for teachers and administrators Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 80% of teachers will engage in relevant and quality professional development related to the Magnet theme of Computer Science and Innovation and results will be measured by a teacher satisfaction survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Satisfaction survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School leaders at PS 62, in recognition of the Chancellor's initiative to share promising practices, applied to participate in the New York City Showcase Schools program for the 2017-2018 school year and were one of 37 schools to be accepted. Three Showcase visits were held and approximately 50 participants attended and provided strong positive feedback about their satisfaction and learning as a result of the visit. Chancellor Carmen Farina herself visited in the Sprint and reported out in the Chancellor's Weekly. "On a recent Showcase School visit to P.S. 62 in Queens, I saw incredible teacher-created resources and interactive lessons that integrated computer science concepts in engaging ways. Principal Angela O’Dowd shared a moving story about how computer science became a personal passion and a school-wide vehicle for creating more opportunities for her students. Her enthusiasm in sharing her practices was infectious. One of the highlights of the day was Play Lab, where students taught visitors how to code using both computed and unplugged activities. Educators from all over New York City came ready to learn, and left with ideas and resources to advance and deepen STEM initiatives at their own schools." PS 62 has been been named again by New York City Department of Education to be a Showcase School for Computer Science, the only school in District 27. We will continue to challenge ourselves to evolve practices in Computer Science, Robotics, 3D printing and acquaponics and share these practices with educators and administrators from around the city. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of participants of the showcase visits will indicate that their visit was valuable or very valuable as measured by a Showcase Evaluation Survey. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principal, tech teachers and three assistant principals will meet once a month to plan and reflect on evaluations with members of the Showcase Team. The principal and tech teachers will create artifacts to distribute to participants. School leaders will work with technology teachers and ELL teachers to ensure that all students have an entry point to coding and Makerspace activities including ELL students and students with disabilities. In addition the technology teachers will coach teachers in grades 1, 3 and 5 in order to build capacity for computer science and robotics. School leaders will work with technology teachers and the parent coordinator in order to plan and implement coding workshops for parents. Coding workshops for parents four times during the school year. School leaders will staff the Playlab with a Magnet Resource Specialist for the purpose of promoting innovative practices in STEM, computer programming and Makerspace. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School Leaders September 2018 to June 2019 School Leaders September 2018 to June 2019 School Leaders September 2018 to June 2019 School Leaders September 2018 to June 2019 School Leaders Teachers Students School Leaders Teachers Students School Leaders Teachers Students Parent Coordinator Parents School Leaders Teachers Students School leaders will meet once a month with the New York Hall of Science consultant in conjunction with the agenda for promoting innovation throughout the school. Parent Coordinator 5  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The principal and three assistant principals will demonstrate distributed leadership and help parents to understand practices in this area by including parents in decision making processes. School leadership meetings will inform parents about all aspects of leadership at the school via a principals report at each meeting throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session activities for supervisors, teachers and auxiliary staff. Professional books and articles/Reflection Journals Materials for computer science Magnet Resource Teacher to staff Playlab Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 85% of participants of the showcase visits will indicate that their visit was valuable or very valuable as measured by a Showcase Evaluation Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Evaluations and analysis sheet from Showcase Schools Team Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 80% of parents responded that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. In addition, 90% of families indicated that they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school event. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of parents will respond sometimes or often that they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school as measured by the results on the School Quality Guide. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers will use the Remind App to communicate opportunities for families to support the class. All school notices, inviting parents to be involved in supporting their school, will be translated into Punjabi and Spanish. Professional development will be provided to teachers by a Federal Magnet consultant on issues of cultural sensitivity and diversity. A survey will be sent to families at the beginning of the year in order to find out ways that they can be involved in school life. For example, career day, mystery reader, international celebrations etc. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018 to June 2019 Teachers and administrators September 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers and administrators September 2018 to June 2019 Administrators, teachers, parents, parent coordinators. September 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers and administrators Parents, Teachers, Parent coordinator and Students Parents, Teachers, Parent coordinator and Students Students Parents Teachers Parent coordinator School Leadership Parents, Teachers, Parent coordinator and Students If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Hall of Science, Cornell (Nutrition), Boys and Girls Club, (SASF) Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8  Per session for staff to provide workshops and translation services Materials/pamplets to provide information for parents in different languages Per session for teachers to share best practices with staff on using the SchoolCNXT App Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 85% of parents will respond sometimes or often that they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school as measured by the results on a mid year survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Created Mid Year Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Fountas and Pinnell Benchmarks ELAState Test Mathematics Mid and End of Unit Tests Math State Test Science Mid and End of Unit Tests Social Studies Mid and End of Unit Tests Guided Reading Spire Program Great Leaps iReady ELATest Prep Close Reading strategies Guided Instruction Small Group instruction daily during guided reading. Individual conferences Small Group iReady Mathematics Test Prep Individual During the school day Saturday Program During the school day Saturday Program Guided Instruction FOSS program Guided Instruction Repeated Readings Small Group During the school day Small Group During the school day At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Teacher Recommendation One full time guidance counselor will provide at-risk Individual, Small Group, 1-1 During the school day 0 School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Screenings services during the day. She will utilizebehavior intervention strategies. Two speech teachers to service at risk students after a screening process. 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 5 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 1. Posters are posted in visible areas of the school to raise awareness. 2. A book reading and discussion with classes will be arranged. 3. Referrals to community-based social services. 4. If necessary, school supplies and clothing will be provided. 5. Children are to be provided services comparable to those received by other students, such as transportation, ELL, related services, counseling, gifted and talented programs, and free school meals. 6. School staff will contact district STH Liaison and family assistants on a regular basis to ensure students' educational needs are met. 7. Attendance will be monitored on a regular basis. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Gather resumes throughout the year from a variety of sources including those substitute teachers who work effectively on per diem jobs at PS 62. Attend NYCDOE Hiring Fairs Create a hiring committee to participate in the interview/demonstration process and provide feedback. Interview candidates and watch demonstration lessons. Monitor applications in the Open Market System Administrators will provide regular professional development, emails, and workshops to ensure that all teachers have opportunities to advance their education. Provide opportunities and encourage teachers to participate in the Innovation Partner Professional Development Program Provide opportunities for teachers to participate in Code.org professional development. Provide opportunities for teachers to become certified in K-2 computer science through Tufts University Provide opportunities for ELL teachers to attend national conferences 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Developing a common understanding of the Danielson Rubric for Teaching and Learning to ensure for CCLS shifts. Hiring committee reflects on incoming prospective teachers using the Danielson Framework 4  Integrating technology to improve pedagogy and curriculum (Smartboards, videos, ipads, ebooks) Evaluating texts to ensure for appropriate complexity using a rubric Use of protocols for discussion techniques and collaboration for students learning Use of protocols for teacher collaboration. Norming of student work and related assessments. Job Embedded Support for Administrators on providing quality feedback to teachers on Danielson’s Rubric District meetings for Special Education Liaisons to build capacity for supporting students with diverse needs. Professional Development for Computer Science for three technology teachers Consultants from Metamorphosis and Generation Ready to support K-5 teachers in math curriculum planning Specialized Professional Development for the Music, Arts and Dance teachers from the NYCDOE. Specialized math professional development for 5th grade teachers involved in the Algebra for All (A4A) Initiative. Specialized summer professional development for the NYCDOE Social Studies curriculum. Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Training for select staff members. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 5  PS 62 hosts a workshop for newly enrolled students to kindergarten who are scheduled to start at the school in September of the following year. At this event, teacher’s present curriculum for parent understanding and the nurse presents information about required vaccinations as well as supports for asthmatics. There are class visitations so that students and parents are familiar with the teachers and classrooms. There is a partnership with Nadia’s Day Care whereby they bring their students to visit the school and the students sing at the orientation event. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers work in grade level teams to make decisions about literacy and math assessments that include phonics, phonemic awareness, vocabulary, fluency, comprehension, writing and mathematics. This year we will continue to place to code assessments by standard and create trackers on an online platform called Mastery Connect. Various consultants will work with teacher teams in order to continue this initiative and build capacity for leadership on the teams. They will use protocols to analyze the data and refine practice in an ongoing assessment cycle. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A,Part 4B Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal 410328 113750 19406 x X x Section 5B, Part 4B Section 5C, Part 4B Section 5D, Part 4B Section 5E, Part 4B Section 8 Section 5A,Part 4B 6  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 15796 5177955 n/a x Section 5C, Part 4B Section 5E, Part 4B n/a Section 5A,Part 4B Section 5B, Part 4B Section 5C, Part 4B Section 5D, Part 4B Section 5E, Part 4B 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 7   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 62Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 62Q will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school 9  surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee supporting or hosting Family Day events;   providing a full time adult education program for English Language Learners and for a Basic Education Degree  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing regular class newsletters about curriculum 0   school website that is updated regularly and use of the school App SchoolCNXT for whole school use and classroom correspondence.  hosting an Annual Makerfaire to highlight Magnet themed projects School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S 62Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 1   arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs Parent/Guardian Responsibilities II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities    attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2     show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 3  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 62 will implement a before and after school program that is designed to focus on ELLs in grades K-5. The language of instruction will be English. Rationale is based on the NYSESLAT, NYS ELA and Math Test for ELLS. Students in Grades 3-5 who scored Level one or two on the NYS ELA and Math test are at risk. These students also scored low on the Reading and Writing Component on the NYSESLAT. ELLs in grades K-2 are at risk based on the Writing and Listening components of the NYSESLAT. At P.S 62 there are a total of 152 ELLS who are receiving ESL services. We will run the program from November to April on Wednesdays and Thursdays before school from 7:00am to 8:00 am and after school from 2:30pm-4:00pm. The language of instruction will be in English with additional Native Language support in Spanish, Punjabi and Urdu, given by four certified ESL teachers running the program who speak those languages. The resources we are using are Jolly Phonics (Jolly Learning LTD), Reading A-Z Website (ELL component), puppets for reader's theater, and Language Power (Teacher Created Materials), which is a supplemental English language development program that is research based. The program builds on students' listening, speaking, reading and writing skills through high interest text sets and games. Language Power uses rich text and themes for authentic context around which to build language in the four domains. We purchased level C for the Mid year ELLs and Level A for Newcomers and SIFE. The program comes with digital resources such as books online, Audio CDs with professional recordings of the text set, ideal for listening centers and models of fluent reading, and student guided practice books that provide meaningful practice in all 4 domains.The program also comes with fun board games designed around the theory of comprehensible output. There are cards and game pieces included. The games enhance vocabulary acquisition and grammar. The Language Power Program also includes parent letters in English and Spanish that introduce the parents to the theme of the units. The letters also show parents how to work with their children at home. The puppets will be used to create real world situations where students will have to speak and listen to each other through dialogue. Students will create real world situations and act them out. Newcomers will be paired with mid year ELL's in order to create opportunities for practice in the speaking and listening domain. Jolly Phonics whiteboard software will be used to teach phonics that will help the K-2 students blend words. This will help the students in reading and writing. Letters will be sent out to parents in various languages inviting them to the program. Attendance will be taken by each teacher using daily attendance sheets and placed in the attendance folders. Attendance will be monitored by an administrator. 5  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: A comprehensive professional development program is provided for the teachers of the Title III program. Rationale-These professional developments provide high quality training that impacts instruction, teacher performance and student learning. The professional developments are targeted to improve the teaching of SIFE, Newcomers and Mid-Year ELLs which our data indicates are our most high needs students. We will also have PDs designed to enhance the teacher's ability to understand and use curricula, assessment measures and instructional strategies for our targeted subgroups. The teachers that are receiving training are three certified ESL teachers responsible for teaching the Title III after school program as well as the ESL Coordinator at P.S. 62. These PDs will be at no cost to the school as they will be "Lunch and Learns," and held during PD Monday. Schedule and Duration-PDs will be held on a monthly basis until April. PDs also include various DELLS PDs that are geared toward our Title III curriculum. Topics Mrs. Rogo, ENL teacher will be attending a series of workshops and turnkeying new learning to the staff and parents. EILI- ELL Instructional Leadership Institute October 19, 2018 November 13, 2018 (future dates to be announced) In addition, a bimonthly newsletter is sent out to all staff with strategies and instructional support. Attendance will be taken at all pd's and the parent coordinator will collect and maintain them in her office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The Parent Coordinator arranges activities for parents whose first language is other than English, to promote English Language acquisition skills. The Parent Coordinator holds ESL classes after school on Wednesdays at no cost. These classes are once a week for 50 minutes. The ESL 6  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities teachers will collaborate with the Parent Coordinator during these ESL classes. Three times this year the ESL teacher will run the Parent ESL class. The ESL teachers will introduce the parents to the Language Power and Focused Reading program. The ESL teachers will discuss with parents how to incorporate strategies and activities from the program at home. These classes help prepare parents of ELLs to teach their children at home. The strategies used are similar to those used in school so that parents are able to support their child's learning at home. The ESL teachers running the Title III after school/morning program will also hold a parent meeting at no cost to teach parents how to better prepare their children for the NYSESLAT. This session will help to improve our student's language acquisition skills as parents will leave the meeting with materials they can use at home and a better sense of what their children are expected to know. All classes for parents run by the ESL teachers will be conducted in English, Spanish, Punjabi, Urdu and Hindi.Topics:Language Power for Parents of ELLsWhat is the NYSESLAT? Jolly Phonics/Phonemic AwarenessThe providers are three certified ESL teachers who collectively speak Spanish, Punjabi, Urdu and Hindi. Invitation letters will be created and sent out in the preferred languages. Agendas will be created by the ESL teachers. Attendance and will be taken at all classes and the parent coordinator will collect and maintain them in her office. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 7 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Other TOTAL 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name Chester Park Borough Queens School Number 62 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Angela O'Dowd Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Sherri Ramesar Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Jennifer Williams Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal Racquel LaVacca Coach N/A School Counselor Joyce Fan Parent Yanina Cordoba Parent Coordinator Aura Fountain Field Support Center Staff Member Pierre Other (Name and Title) Grace Ruffo C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 944 9 Total number of ELLs 154 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 16.31%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Lang. NA NA NA NA NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 62 has created a Primary Literacy Assessment (incorporating aspects of ECLAS -2 and Fountas and Pinnell Early Literacy Assessment) that is used to evaluate students' phonemic awareness, phonics and vocabulary skills in Grades K-2. The reading performance for all students in Grades K-5 is assessed using the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment Kit.This encompasses accuracy, fluency and comprehension skills. All of this data is recorded in a P.S. 62 developed online spreadsheet which is transparent to all stakeholders. ENL teachers use Mastery Connect to monitor the progress of all ELLs by assessing and tracking mastery of common core standards. It also helps identify levels of understanding and target students to improve learning. 0  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Formative assessments are supported by using the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark System (3 times a year), K-2 Primary Literacy Assessment (twice a year) and Math baseline tests (twice a year) for universal screening. The assessments that monitor ongoing progress are running records, Jolly Phonics Sound Assessments, math assessments, Reading Plus Program and progress reports.Teachers on each grade are shared in a Master Spreadsheet where data is recorded such as: Fountas and Pinnell Levels, letter recognition, letter sounds and high frequency words. Google spreadsheets, Mastery Connect and PLA's are used to support these efforts. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ENL team uses the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores to group students according to their English proficiency. The REXH (Exam History Report) is used to identify students progress and areas of need. This is done by looking at the scores from previous years to track progress within each modality. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Each year students speaking, listening, reading, writing and NYSESLAT data are evaluated by the teachers. Using the NYSESLAT, success is measured by an increase in level in the four modalities. Teachers also examine the number of students that test out of the ENL program. The teachers use Mastery connect to measure the student progress in moving from Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills to Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency. Students are expected to achieve the school benchmark reading levels using Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Reading Assessment Kit. The Primary Literacy Assessment is used to evaluate students' phonemic awareness, phonics and vocabulary and their scores are compared with school benchmarks. Specific writing tasks are part of the classroom teachers curriculum and are accompanied by grade specific rubrics. All students’ writing is assessed using these rubrics and moderated across the grade. These results are reviewed and the achievement of ELLs is specifically discussed and noted. Strategies to promote further achievement are identified and shared across the grade and student results are shared with the ENL teachers. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] There are many forms of data that PS 62 uses to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework. The school uses the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark System (3 times a year), K-2 Primary Literacy Assessment (twice a year) and Math baseline tests (twice a year) for universal screening. The assessments that monitor ongoing progress are running records, Jolly Phonics Sound Assessments, math assessments and reading plus and progress reports. ENL teachers also take small groups during the morning and after school to target instruction to ELLs within the RtI framework. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data from the NYSESLAT and the NYSITELL are primarily used to program students according to the needed number of unit of studies. The scores from each modality are taken into consideration and used to guide and direct teacher instruction. P.S 62 has also adopted a new assessment tool known as Mastery Connect. This tool helps the teachers track student progress on the common core standards. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL team has created a google document where all the students and their scores in each modality are tracked. Programming classes is done based on this document. The classroom teachers also have access to this document so that they can make changes to grouping within their classrooms. 1  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are grouped in classes based on NYSESLAT/NYSITELL levels. ENL teachers support classroom teachers with ReadyGen curriculum along with language scaffolds. The classes are heterogeneously mixed but administrators who try to group the ELLs according to proficiency levels so that pull out groups would be homogeneous. Since all the ENL teachers are Dually certified, a pull out ENL program is utilized within our school. ENL teachers will pull out 8 periods for Entering and Emerging ELLs and 4 periods for Transitioning and Expanding students. Wherever possible Expanding and Commanding students will be grouped together. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? There are 3 certified ENL teachers to provide the mandated instruction to the ELLs. One teacher pulls out kindergarten ELLs while grade 1 and grade 2 are serviced by another teacher. The third teacher services grade 3 and 2nd grade expanding students. The fourth teacher services grades 4 and 5.The ENL teachers meet the mandated number of instructional minutes required for ELLs based on CR-Part 154-2. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At P.S 62 the ENL teachers design lessons that target content and language objectives in reading, writing, speaking and listening and address the Common Core Standards in those areas. Topics discussed are in keeping with the overall school, grade and class PBL Units which are now aligned with Literacy, Science, and Social Studies Standards. The ENL teachers use the research based programs National Geographic Reach, Backpack by Pearson's and supplement it with systematic phonics instruction (Jolly Phonics). An online program called Moby Max is also used to supplement the content and language objectives. Lessons are delivered using a gradual release of responsibility model along with a variety of supportive research based scaffolds for ELLs. The National Geographic Program forms the basis of the curriculum for ELLs within our program which is aligned to PBL Units. This program contains both nonfiction and fictional texts. Tracking the content and language standards within this program is achieved using Mastery Connect, an online grading and tracking system. Mastery Connect is an online resource that helps teachers identify and track student mastery of Common Core State Standards. ENL teachers also support content area vocabulary instruction along with concept development, based on Curriculum maps. Teachers use a variety of formative assessments such as oral reading, short written tasks and oral language observations to continuously assess their students in order to monitor their progress and plan future lessons based on their finding. All this is tracked once again using Mastery Connect. 2  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students who indicate that they speak Spanish on their HLIS form are evaluated using the NYSITELL. If they did not meet criteria for testing out, the Spanish LAB is administered to them. ELA,Math and Science tests are also orally translated and given in Spanish, Urdu and Punjabi throughout the year 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) The school has no one specific program to meet the needs of SIFE students. Instead, teachers provide additional support by pulling out ELLs, according to the student’s level of proficiency in line with the State mandated minutes for instruction during their literacy block.This will include understanding classroom routines so that students are assimilated into the culture of school and providing additional vocabulary to support content instruction. Pictures and other visual materials are used to generate language so that students acquire particular words, gestures and intonations that are appropriate in school contexts. The online program Mobymax also allows the SIFE students to fix learning gaps in their academic development. This can be achieved independently by the students as Mobymax diagnoses them on their independent levels. This information is shared with the classroom teacher through informal contact and follow up resources. b) To help newly enrolled ELLs gain English language phonemic awareness skills, a systematic phonics approach is adopted during literacy instruction. This program is implemented according to the student’s level of proficiency in line with the State mandated minutes for instruction. The Jolly Phonics approach is used consistently across the school in Grades K-2 and is also supported by the ENL teachers. The program is NCLB approved. This year Mobymax was introduced to support our ELLs in phonics and academic content. The programs, Backpack and National Geographic Reach are also used to support newcomers in vocabulary development. Additional instruction is provided in test taking strategies for students in grades 3-5 to ensure that students are prepared to fulfill their potential. Information is shared with the classroom teacher through informal contact and follow up resources. Certified ENL teachers administer the program. c) In recognition of the fact that academic vocabulary is acquired over many years, a key component of the program for ELLs receiving 4-6 years of service is a focus on Tier 2 vocabulary. The program National Geographic Reach, Levels A-F are used and vocabulary is introduced thematically, with multiple exposures and opportunities for practice. The program is multi sensory, incorporating songs, interactive computer activities and picture cards to ensure vocabulary acquisition is meaningful. This pull out support is provided during literacy instruction, according to the student’s level of proficiency in line with the State mandated minutes for instruction. Information is shared with the classroom teacher through informal contact and follow up resources. Certified ENL teachers administer the program. d) Based on the “ELL’s by subgroup” column in the Lap worksheet form, we don't have English Language Learners receiving service for 7 or more years. e) The ENL teacher works with former English Language Learners mostly on content area vocabulary that is aligned to the unit of study based on the Ready Gen curriculum, as well as Tier 2 vocabulary. In addition to this students in grades 3-5 were using a pilot program called “Reading Plus” that focused on reading skills and vocabulary. This is an online silent reading program for students who have tested out of ENL services. 3  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers utilize National Geographic Reach, Levels A-F, and Mobymax program to accelerate English language development. Mastery Connect is used to track goals and monitor progress on the Common core standards. All teachers of ELL-SWDs ensure that the content is comprehensible by providing instruction in content specific vocabulary, using Big Books, BrainPop and National Geographics online resources, picture cards and informational texts. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ENL teachers collaborate with other service providers to flexibly schedule services for ELL-SWDs so that they receive all of their entitlements ensuring that they meet their IEP goals. At the beginning of the year ENL teachers meet with Special Education teachers to review IEP goals for students and also attend IEP meetings throughout the year. Classroom teachers of ELL-SWDs schedule their instruction around the time table of service providers to ensure that core curriculum is delivered to students to ensure they meet their IEP goals. The Speech Pathologist uses the class curriculum maps to coordinate her instruction and reinforce student’s goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. a) Grade common Curriculum Planning periods provide opportunities for ENL teachers to collaborate with classroom teachers and communicate about the individual needs of specific students. (Newcomers-Entering, Emerging) b) Classroom teachers have center work provided by the ENL teachers. (Newcomer, SIFE & 4-6 year ELL students) c) At present there are no ELLs who are identified as long term. However, generally students who are ELLs and have an IEP receive additional small group instruction from a SETSS service provider. d) There will be a Morning and After School program in place for Entering, Emerging,Transitioning and Expanding students in grades K-5. This program is funded by Title III. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the 2018-2019 school year, P.S. 62 will use the complete package of Mobymax. Based on the 2017-2018 data, students did show high level of interest in using this product. Also the school will be using Reading A-Z (ELL component) and Reading Plus to supplement resources. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Equal access to all school programs is provided for all ELLs through the provision of letters, information, flyers in languages other than English. Parent workshops are facilitated by the Parent Coordinator and interpreters are provided. Parent Orientation Meetings are conducted on an ongoing basis for newly enrolled ELLs, facilitated by the ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, and the Administration. There will be an Morning and After School program in place for Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding ELLs in grades K-5. Certified ENL teachers will teach the program using Language Power. This is a nonfiction supplementary program for ELLs that targets vocabulary and sharpens reading comprehension skills through hands on activities and picture cards. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 4  Each ENL teacher’s classroom is equipped with a wide range of technology, print, visual, and auditory resources This includes such items as iPods, iPads, Computers, SMARTboards, Prometheans, picture cards, puppets, posters, and a wide variety of books for many purposes. Hands on materials for STEM, science, maps and online resources for Social Studies. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? As part of the ENL program, dictionaries in various languages are available for student use in the ENL Room and Mainstream classrooms. Spanish language books and online resources are also available in mainstream classrooms . If necessary the ENL teachers can provide support in a range of languages other than English. Teachers group students of the same language for certain activities so that they can assist each other and respond in their native language. Spanish Classroom Libraries for 1st, 2nd and 3rd grade from Mondo Publishing are available for students to read. Ipad apps like Remind and “i Translate” are also used to support home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. National Geographic Reach, Language Power, Jolly Phonics Reading Plus and Mobymax are all programs that are designed for elementary school students. ENL teachers group their students by age and grade level where appropriate. Teachers have access to Fountas & Pinnell's Guided Reading texts for guided reading. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Prior to the commencement of the school year, a Parent Orientation meetings are held where parents and new students can meet the teacher. This group also includes newly enrolled ELLs. Ongoing workshops are conducted where parents are provided with a range of simple and effective early literacy materials to use with their child during the vacation, giving them a Head Start to School. Interpreters are provided for both of these meetings. During the first month at school, Parent Orientation Week is held, where parents have the chance to meet their child’s teacher and hear about class routines and expectations. The Parent Coordinator is very approachable and always available to respond to parent concerns and needs.Arrangements are made in school, for Grade 5 students to become familiar with their future middle school. Parents are invited to attend a Middle School information meeting in November. This may include, nearby school personnel speaking with 5th grade students at a special assembly. The school's guidance counselor is in charge of this activity. 17: What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18: N/A Professional Development and support for school staff 1: Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All ENL teachers participated in a SIFE Webinar to help with the identification of ELLs. One ENL teacher attends the Queen's South Elementary K-8 ELL Instructional Leadership Institute (EILI) as a school representative who then turnkeys important policy changes/teaching strategies to the staff. The ENL teacher participates in a series of six full day professional development workshops throughout the school year At each workshop, a problem of practice is identified and strategies are taught and implemented to support ELLs as they engage in grade appropriate Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers also attend a series of professional development workshops that focus on Academic 5  Language for ELLs. Teachers then turnkey important strategies to the team and these strategies are shared with school based staff through the ENL monthly newsletter as well as meeting with classroom teachers to assist our English Language Learners in all content areas of instruction. 2: Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements……. All parents (including parents of ELLs) are invited to the various workshops offered at PS 62. Some of the workshops planned forthis year are curriculum planning, arts and crafts, technology,content area workshops, preparation for New York State exams, and Early Literacy workshops. All parents are invited to two unit celebrations and Publishing Day in June. All parents are invited to attend, along with their child, evening family fun nights which focus on different content areas, e.g. literacy, math, science, art and sports night. Parents are also invited to volunteer and participate in special events such as Field Day, the Halloween Dance and class trips. Parents attend Meet the Teacher Day, where they can get information and ask questions about curriculum. Teachers invite parents to various functions and every effort is made to send notifications of such events in the native languages represented in our school. The school website provides information for parents. Key flyers, invitations, forms, permission slips etc. are translated and sent home and will be posted in Punjabi, Bengali, Urdu, Spanish, Arabic and Hindi. The Parent Coordinator arranges activities for parents whose first language is other than English, to promote English Language acquisition skills. The strategies used are similar to those used in school so that parents are Able to support their child’s learning at home. Activities range across the Five Pillars, identified by the National Reading Panel. In addition, the Parent Coordinator capitalizes on this time to develop home school Relationships with parents in order to help them understand and value Education and needs of their children. Scheduled meetings are held regularly twice each week and sessions last 1 ¼ hours. Parents were notified of these sessions during the mandated Parent Orientation to identify ELLs and follow up was made by the Coordinator and teachers of ELL students. Parents then signed up to make a regular commitment. The Parents who participate then follow up with others and encouragethem to attend. The Parent Coordinator acts as a translator for parents who attend and ENL teachers within the school also speak a range of community languages and are called upon to assist as necessary. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 6  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The Professional Development plan for ENL teachers and mainstream teachers focuses on the following: • Developing an understanding of the four modalities in the English Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and their implications for the instruction of English Language Learners. Embedding the shifts implicit in the CCLS into instruction for ELLs, specifically with a focus on tiers of vocabulary and English language conventions. • Ensuring that the instruction of ELLs incorporates the use of technology, in line with the CCLS. • Utilizing technology to analyze information about students’ literacy performance • Developing an online support - Tool Kit - collaboratively between ESL and mainstream teachers. Strategies to be used include support from the in school literacy consultant through the provision of workshops, and coaching, and support for inter visitations, provision of weekly grade level professional periods and after school meetings with an inquiry focus. ENL teachers are available to assist mainstream teachers with ideas and resources with reference to the Scaffolding Language Scaffolding Learning: Teaching Second Language Learners In a Mainstream Classroom by Pauline Gibbons. All teachers of ELLs will participate in a professional development day planned for Election Day. This will focus on specific domains of the Danielson Framework for Teaching: • incorporating the development of an inclusive School Culture action plan,with specific reference for ELLs • development of Universal Design for Learning strategies to support all students. • the identification of focused personal professional learning objectives from Domains 2 and 3b of the Danielson Framework Additional ENL professional development will focus on: • Developing a new curriculum in line with the ReadyGen program, to ensure that students are prepared to meet the Common Core Learning Standards. • Ensuring that the ENL Speaking and Listening Continuum integrates the criteria of CCLS and the ReadyGen program to guide goal setting and monitoring of progress. • Using technology to record students’ oral language development Professional Development for this year will be every Monday for 80 minutes. PD will focus on ReadyGen 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Arrangements are made by the school, for Grade 5 students to become familiar with their future middle school. This includes; nearby school personnel speaking with 5th grade students at a special assembly, students with their parents being invited to visit their new school, and an informational meeting held by the Guidance Counselor for the parents of 5th graders at which translators are provided. Two whole day professional development workshops will be held to provide training and development for ENL and Mainstream teachers addressing the needs of ELLs. These will occur on Election Day and Chancellor’s Day during the year. This professional development meets the requirements under Jose P. for Mainstream teachers. Agendas and sign in 7  sheets are collected and placed in a binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During the school year ENL teachers and Content teachers meet individually with each parent to discuss the ENL program at P.S. 62. ENL teachers discuss language development progress within the content area. Content area teachers are also present during these meetings to discuss the scaffolds used during content area instruction. ENL teachers also conduct a parent meeting discussing NYSESLAT results and the new levels. The ENL teachers speak Spanish, Urdu and Punjabi during these meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents (including parents of ELLs) are invited to the various workshops offered at PS 62. Some of the workshops planned for this year are curriculum planning, arts and crafts, technology, content area workshops, preparation for New York State exams, and Early Literacy workshops. All parents are invited to two unit celebrations and Publishing Day in May. All parents are invited to attend, along with their child, evening family fun nights which focus on different content areas, e.g. literacy, math and art. Parents are also invited to volunteer and participate in special events such as Field Day, the Halloween Dance and class trips. Parents attend Meet the Teacher Day, where they can get information and ask questions about curriculum. Teachers invite parents to Every effort is made to send notifications of such events in the native languages represented in our school. The school website provides information for parents. Key flyers, invitations, forms, permission slips etc. are translated and sent home and will be posted in Punjabi, Bengali, Urdu, Spanish, Arabic and Hindi. The Parent Coordinator arranges activities for parents whose first language is other than English, to promote English Language acquisition skills. The strategies used are similar to those used in school so that parents are able to support their child’s learning at home. Activities range across the Five Pillars, identified by the National Reading Panel. In addition, the Parent Coordinator capitalizes on this time to develop home school relationships with parents in order to help them understand and value education and the needs of their children. Scheduled meetings are held regularly twice each week and sessions last 1 ¼ hours. Parents were notified of these sessions during the mandated Parent Orientation to identify ELLs and follow up was made by the Coordinator and teachers of ELL students. Parents then signed up to make a regular commitment. The parents who participate then follow up with others and encourage them to attend. The Parent coordinator acts as a translator for parents who attend and ENL teachers within the school also speak a range of community languages and are called upon to assist as necessary. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 8  9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Angela O'Dowd, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Chester Park School DBN: 27Q62 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Angela O'Dowd Title Principal Racquel LaVacca Assistant Principal Aura Fountain Parent Coordinator Merwyn Viegas ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Joyce Fan School Counselor Grace Ruffo Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q062 School Name: 062 Superintendent: Mary Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Aura Fountain Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication are based on Parent Orientation meeting informal surveys and the HLIS forms. After parents attend the meeting ENL teachers take note of what langugae parents prefer to communicate with and each parent letter is translated accordingly. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish 126 10.33 142 11.64 2  Punjabi Urdu Bengali 123 13 29 10.08 1.07 2.38 154 21 42 12.62 1.72 3.44 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish, Punjabi, Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Some go to Translation Division of DOE/Some translated by staff Some go to Translation Division of DOE/Some translated by staff Some go to Translation Division of DOE/Some translated by staff Some go to Translation Division of DOE/Some translated by staff Parent Brochure, Meet the Staff, Once a Year newsletters, orientations, events Monthly parent-teacher conference notices, 4 Times a year Testing Information 4 Times a year 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Meet the Staff Night, September 13, 2018 Once a Year Parent Teacher Conferences, November 15, 2018 Once a year Parent Teacher Conferences March 14, 2019 Once a Year interpretation service(s)? PS 62 uses Interpretation vendors as well as staff members Hire interpretation vendors as well as staff members Hire interpretation vendors as well as staff members 3  Maker Faire May 15, 2019 Once a Year Hire interpretation vendors as well as staff members 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have staff members who speak most languages. We use the interpretation help phone line and have the number posted in the office by the phone. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff Handbook Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At P.S. 62 we use the parent survey to gather feedback on the quality and availability of services. 4 
