 27Q064 School Name: P.S. 064 JOSEPH P. ADDABBO Principal: ELIZABETH MITCHELL   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Joseph P. Addabbo School 27Q064 342700010064 K-5 School Number (DBN): 82-01 101 st Avenue, Ozone Park, NY 11416 718-845-8290 718-848-0052 Phone Number: Fax: Elizabeth Mitchell Emitche4@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Elizabeth Mitchell Michele Mosca MD BazarHossain Email Address: Parents’ Association President: Elizabeth Mitchell and Tara Cortes SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Christina Brindescu N/A NA N/A District Information Jennifer Ambert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd., Room 201B, Ozone Park, NY 11416 JAmbert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5800 Phone Number: 718-348-2994 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, N.Y. 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: Mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 281-3259 Phone Number: (718) 391-6187 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Elizabeth Mitchell Kimberly Richardson MD BazarHossain Yolanda Nazario Christina Dans Tara Cortes AfrozaNila Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Aysha begum LailaAhmed Laila Noor Ahmed Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview School Mission: PS 64, The Joseph P. Addabbo School, is a united group of diverse learners who respect each other and strive to succeed in all academic areas. By holding ourselves to high standards, we will be college bound 21st century learners and leaders.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. School Demographic : PS 64-The Joseph P. Addabbo School is an elementary school with 565 students from Kindergarten through Grade 5. The school population is comprised of 58% Asian, 33% Hispanic, 4% Black, 2% White, 4% Other. The student body includes 18% English Language Learners (ELL) and 11% Students with Disabilities (SWD). Boys account for 51% of the students enrolled and girls account for 49%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 is 95% with 17% Students Chronically Absent. School Community: PS 64 is a “Leader In Me” school. As a school focused on developing student leadership, respect is a core principle which is truly integrated into the culture of our school environment. To support us in establishing this environment grounded in mutual respect, P.S.64 implements The Leader In Me framework to communicate a common vision and establish a common language of respect and responsibility for all stakeholders throughout our school. The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People are an integral element of The Leader In Me framework so our students are provided with direct instruction in these principles: Habit 1: Be Proactive – “You’re in Charge” Habit 2: Begin With The End In Mind – “Plan ahead and Set goals” Habit 3: Put First Things First – “Work First Then Play” Habit 4: Think Win-Win – “Everyone Can Win” Habit 5: Seek First To Understand, Then To Be Understood – “Listen Before You Talk” Habit 6: Synergize – “Together is Better” Habit 7: Sharpen the Saw – “Balance Feels Best” The first three Habits are focused on self-mastery and support our students in moving from dependence to independence. Habits 4, 5, and 6 are focused on developing collaboration and communication skills and move students to interdependence (positively working with others). At PS 64, The Joseph P. Addabbo School, we believe that learning is active, learning is challenging and we learn best through collaboration. Based on this belief, our school’s instructional focus for 2018-2019 is: IF teachers carefully use student learning data to plan and implement lessons that meaningfully engage students in rigorous skills and content and give actionable feedback to students, THEN students will develop the critical thinking skills required to take leadership of their learning. At PS 64, we do not view students as passive recipients of information. Instead, we believe that students learn best when they are active participants in the learning process. We understand that when children are able to ask questions, engage in discussion, explore, assess and reflect on what they know as learners, they are better able to construct meaning and understanding of the concepts/ideas being taught. 0  Based on this philosophy, our teachers work in teams to collaboratively develop units of study aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards for each grade. When designing academic tasks, teachers utilize Webb’s Depth of Knowledge (DOK) and the Universal Design for Learning (UDL) as a resource for ensuring that the tasks strategically allow for higher order cognitive engagement for all students (including ELLs and SWDs) and support the critical thinking necessary for college and career readiness. Common Planning periods are built into the school’s program to allow teacher teams to meet weekly to collaboratively plan and refine the unit plans to ensure alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards and embed the instructional shifts. Teachers ensure that students are exposed to a balance of literary and informational texts, often integrating Science and Social Studies content. Teachers have embedded text-dependent questions throughout our units plans to ensure that students have ample opportunities to cite text-based evidence to support their claims. Students are engaged in close reading of exemplar texts for each grade. Students are engaged in evidentiary–based writing units to further meet the demands of the CCLS. Academic vocabulary is explicitly taught throughout instruction. Teachers ensure that students are engaged in solving multiple step problems which allow them to apply the skills learned, as well as to engage in conversations that allow them to express their conceptual understanding of the concepts. To support this work we use the following programs as the primary curriculum resources to guide our instruction: EnVision Math, ReadyGen Literacy, Harcourt Science, NYC Passport to Social Studies, Fundations, Word Work & Word Play Guide for Vocabulary Instruction. Across classrooms, teachers employ a range of strategies for providing multiple entry points into the curricula for all students, (including ELLs and SWDs) as well as implementing clear systems for monitoring student participation and engagement:  Anchoring all lessons in standards-based, student-friendly learning targets and success criteria.  Explicit teaching through teacher modeling and demonstration to establish clear expectations for success.  Assessing students’ prior knowledge before launching new content.  Scaffolding through flexible small group instruction:Use of varying graphic organizers, visual aids, and student partnerships for peer support.  Use of technology as a resource and instructional tool-Smartboards, audio, computers, tablets, videos, movies, and other online resources.  Use and display of teaching /anchor charts/exemplars throughout the classroom that students can use as    reference points. Frontloading and chunking of information for our ELLs and SWDs. Lessons anchored in an essential question/anchor question, in addition to embedding higher order thinking questions throughout lessons. Students are consistently expected to justify and make their thinking visible by providing text-based evidence to support their answers and/or questions.  Teachers utilize a range of strategies (beyond turn and talks) to afford students the opportunity to engage in discussions with each other. Students are taught to use accountable talk stems to build upon each other's thinking. Students assume leadership roles within their classrooms.    Teachers have created checklists to monitor and gather data on student learning and participation.  Teachers have implemented various structures to allow students to self-monitor and to be reflective on their learning. Students engage in peer-assessments.   Teachers consistently engage in inquiry work through the Data Action Phase Model to identify and address instructional and learning gaps that impact student achievement. Schoolwide Partnerships/Initiatives:  The Leader in Me with Franklin Covey 1  2017 Respect For All School  Young People’s Chorus of NYC satellite school  Disney Musical In School participant  Algebra for All –NYC Equity and Excellence Cohort 1 Participant  Carnegie Hall Partnerships  Ballet Tech Partnership  Queens College Partnership for College and Career Readiness School’s Challenge: Student performance at grade level proficiency, in both reading and mathematics continues to be a challenge. While we do see progress of students moving within benchmark levels for reading; we still have a majority of students performing below grade level proficiency as is evident by the following data: 2017-2018 - NYS ELA: 54.9% of grades 3, 4,5 students met proficiency; 26.2% approaching; 18.9% below 2017-2018 NYS Math: 50.8% of grade 3, 4,5 students met proficiency; 24.3 % approaching, 24.9% below 2018 June Instructional Reports revealed that 2017-2018 EOY TCRWP Benchmark Data: 52.0% of all students met the established EOY Independent Reading benchmark. This is a 1.0% increase in overall student independent reading levels from BOY to EOY. Total: 48.0% not meeting benchmark. 2017-2018 EOY Envisions Math Data: 50.0% of all students met the established EOY Math benchmark. Another major challenge that we face is low parent involvement. During 2017-2018 only 69% of our families participated in Student Led Conferences, which is a new schoolwide initiative. On average, only 27% of our parent population attends workshops conducted by the school. Traditional parent teacher conferences attendance shows the highest parent participation with 84% of parents attending the November PTC and 91% of parents attending the March PTC. Back to School Night had only 42% in attendance and May PTC/Family Night had our lowest turn-out of 24%. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 11% of our student body is Students with Disabilities (SWD). These students range in ability. Classifications include, but are not limited to autism, learning disabilities, intellectual disabilities, social emotional disabilities, speech and language impairments, and sensory impairments. In keeping with the CCLS and the Chancellor's Framework for Great Schools, our curriculum is implemented so that it meets the academic, social-emotional and transitional needs of each student. 18% of our student body is English Language Learners (ELL). These students require additional direct language and instructional support to access the curriculum. We offer stand-alone and integrated ENL services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework for Great Schools: Element of Most progress: Supportive Environment- 93% of those who took the survey responded positively that the school establishes a culture where students feel safe, challenged to grow and supported to meet high expectations. We attribute this positive movement to the implementation of The Leader in Me framework established a clear mission grounded in developing students as leaders. This framework focused the work/responsibility of all 2  constituents, including parents. A key component of The Leader in Me is training parents on the 7 Habits, which will be our focus this year. Key Area of Focus: Collaborative Teachers- 88% of teachers responded positively to the question about teacher participation in opportunities to develop, grow and contribute to the continuous improvement of the school community. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q064 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 616 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 13 12 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 11 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 74.0% % Attendance Rate 72.2% % Reduced Lunch 20.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.1% 31.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 54.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 87% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 47 48 5 94.2% 1.0% 10.6% 3.2% 59.7% 4.2% 2 0% 6.7 50.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths : P.S. 64 has developed systems that support structured professional collaborations, specifically through the implementation of the Data Action Model. Teacher teams review student work samples and discuss possible adjustments to practice to further support student learning. NYS Student Achievement data reveals an upward trend: 2017-2018 - NYS ELA: 54.9% of grades 3, 4,5 students met proficiency (10% increase from 44.5% in 2016-2017) 2017-2018- NYS Math: 50.8% of grade 3, 4,5 students met proficiency (7.6% increase from 43.2% in 2016-2017) 2018 June Instructional Reports revealed that our students are performing better in their constructed responses for ELA. 2017-2018 EOY TCRWP Benchmark Data: 52.0% of all students met the established EOY Independent Reading benchmark. This is a 1.0% increase in overall student independent reading levels from BOY to EOY. 2017-2018 EOY Envisions Math Data: 50.0% of all students met the established EOY Math benchmark Needs : The 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review identified Quality indicator 1.2 (pedagogy) as an area of improvement citing that the "school must continue to support instructional practice so that teachers strategically plan and implement lessons, in alignment with the school-wide instructional focus that meets the needs of all learners, promoting high levels of student thinking, participation and discussion." The school must continue to "work on the quality of the tasks that students are asked to complete, keeping in mind the level of engagement for students as well as ensuring that all students are cognitively engaged and supported.” It further cited that “It is critical that teachers use the information gathered (student learning data) to support students around specific skills and strategies. 5  On the 2018 School Quality Guide, based on ratings provided by teachers, rigorous instruction remains an area of focus for the school, although a recent increase from 3.55 in 2017 to 3.60 in 2018, there previously was a downward trend of 3.80 in 2015, 3.64 in 2016 and 3.55 in 2017. Although the majority of our ELL students are performing at the Expanding and Commanding proficiency levels as indicated by the 2017-2018 NYSESLAT results, a closer look at the NYS ELA exam shows a disproportionate number of our ELL students are performing below proficiency levels as compared to all students with 59.3% of ELLs at level 1 while 18.9% of all students are level 1. Therefore, this demonstrate a need within our ELL subgroup as they comprise more than half of our total level 1 in our school. A similar disproportionately exists in Math for the ELL subgroup as for ELA. A closer look at the June Instructional Report reveals that the area of most struggle is constructed responses. Priority Area : In order to develop the students’ literacy skills, teachers must consistently analyze assessment data to ensure that instruction is cognitively challenging for students through appropriately scaffolded lessons, which focuses on improving student reading comprehension, as well as language acquisition. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of the academic intervention plans created to address instruction within our instructional core, there will be a 5% increase (from ___% to ___%) in the percentage of continuously enrolled English Language Learners in grades K-5 reading at or above proficiency as measured by the TCRWP Independent Reading Benchmark Assessments. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration and teacher teams will create a year-long strategic assessment calendar, indicating formative, midpoint and culminating assessments. Students’ reading levels will be assessed at least 3 times during the 2018-2019 school year using F & P Assessment. All Pedagogues September 2018-June 2019 After an analysis of the BOY F & P independent reading levels, classroom teachers will develop action plans to identify and address the needs of all students, including lowest third, ELL and Students with Disabilities; Teachers’ lesson plans will reflect modifications to the curricula based on student data from formative assessments. September 2018-June 2019 All students in grades K-5 All Pedagogues Student sub-groups Classroom teachers will participate in at minimum two Data Meetings to monitor their ELL students and discuss their next steps for moving those students forward. All classroom teachers September 2018-June 2019 Students will have a Learning Reflection Log which informs them of their strengths and next steps. Students will also use an independent reading tracking card to track their reading progress. Students September 2018-June 2019 A series of professional learning sessions will be provided to teachers focused on supplemental resources and strategies that will support all students’ understanding of complex text and All Pedagogues October 2018-June 2019 Classroom & ENL Teachers Test Coordinator Administrators Literacy Coach Classroom & ENL Teachers Test Coordinator Administrators Literacy Coach Classroom & ENL Teachers Test Coordinator Administrators Literacy Coach Classroom & ENL Teachers Test Coordinator Administrators Literacy Coach Administrators 7 content, as well as academic vocabulary instruction aligned to CCLS, with a heightened focus on ELL students. Teachers will continue to utilize the professional text: The Reading Strategies Book: Your Everything Guide to Developing Skilled Readers by Jennifer Serravallo Text: No More Low Expectations for ELLs will anchor teachers' professional development Students with Disabilities will be provided with support from a licensed Special Education teacher and English Language Learners will be provided PIPO support from an ENL specialist. Additional remediation will be provided for students in AIS during the school day or afterschool based on student performance. Staff Development Committee/Vertical Planning Committee Classroom & ENL Teachers Literacy Coach September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, ENL providers, SETSS Teachers. AIS providers, Literacy Coach ELL Students With Disabilities Students in need of academic support 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning September 2018-June 2019, all parents will be provided with ample opportunities to be engaged and informed about their child's progress through: Student Led Conferences, Progress Reports, Report Cards, Parent Workshops and Parent-Teacher Conferences. School will host Family Reading Events to promote strategies for engaging students in reading. ELL specific workshops will be offered to parents of ENL students. Key personnel responsible for the implementation of these activities will be: Principal, Assistant principals, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Literacy Coach Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common Planning Time Weekly double linkage periods for teacher team work Instructional Resources, including technology support Per Diem Coverages for Teacher Data Meetings 8  Human Resources: Administrators, Data Specialists, Staff Development Committee/Vertical Planning Team, Grade Team leaders Data Phase Action model protocol Professional Text: The Reading Strategies Book: Your Everything Guide to Developing Skilled Readers by Jennifer Serravallo Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2.5% increase (from___% to ___%) in the percentage of continuously enrolled English Language Learners reading at or above proficiency as measured by the TCRWP Independent Reading Benchmark Assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) TCRWP Benchmark Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths : PS 64 is a Leader in Me school. This program gives us the "Measurable Results Assessment" tool, which captures data on school culture, specifically, supportive environment. 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review cited QR Indicator 1.4 Positive Learning Environment as strength of the school. Specifically, "Students are celebrated on a monthly basis for academics and leadership. Opportunities are created for student-led presentations connected to the 7 Habits within the Leader in Me program. Teachers embed The Leader in Me practices within their classrooms and consistently refer to the 7 Habits promoting leadership across the school community." 2017 Framework for Great Schools Report indicates that Supportive Environment was one of our strongest element (4.04). Specific area of strength in this element was safety at 96%. Needs: The 3 Year Incident and Suspension Report indicates: 2015-2016: 3 infractions, 0 suspensions. 2016-2017: 11 infractions, 0 suspensions 2017-2018: 32 infractions and 1 Superintendent Suspension. 2017-2018 OORS data indicates there has been an increase in incidents for infraction codes A22 & A24 (level 3) - accounts for 55% of all infractions. Location summary indicates that these incidents are occurring in the cafeteria, playground and auditorium. Hourly analysis showed that during the lunch periods, highest in grades K & 1 lunch periods and lowest in grades 4 & 5 lunch periods. Priority Area : 0  If we effectively implement the Leader in Me framework in our school and establish strong partnerships with parents, then our students will develop the critical social-emotional skills to become independent thinkers, problem solvers and leaders. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of the intervention plans created to address students' social emotional learning, there will be a 5% decrease (from 55% to 50%) in percentage of level 3 infractions as measured by the June 2019 OORS Occurrence Summary. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School Leaders will unpack SEL Action Plan (competencies, skills, and practices) with the staff. All staff September 2018 -November 2018 Administrators Lead Teachers on the Leader in Me Lighthouse Team/SEL Team Guidance Counselor Provide training to school aides on utilizing the systems and structures effectively, particularly in the school yard, cafeteria, and auditorium. School Aides September 2018-October 2018 September 2018-June 2019 Administration SEL Team Guidance Counselor Classroom Teachers Administration Lead Teachers on the Leader in Me Lighthouse Team/SEL Team Guidance Counselor Administration Parent Coordinator Establish clear expectations for student behavior in all settings throughout the school. All staff Increase student to adult ratio by creating opportunities for lunch time parent volunteers and student leaders. Parents Students September 2018-June 2019 2 School Aides  SEL Team Guidance Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly workshops on behavioral expectations will be conducted with families October 2018-June 2019. Key Personnel: Lighthouse/SEL Team, Administration, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Teachers, Staff Frequent one-on-one parent meetings to co-create behavioral action plans for students in need or at risk. Ongoing analysis of OORS data at Safety Meetings and School Leadership Team meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. per session for planning and training per diem for planning, training resources (DVDs, recess equipment, incentives for positive student behavior, posters) Materials//Resources for parent workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of the intervention plans created to address social emotional learning, there will be a 2.5% decrease (from 55%% to 52..5%) in percentage of level 3 infractions as measured by the June 2019 OORS Occurrence Summary. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Multiple OORS Reports: Occurrence Summary, Hourly Incidence Analysis, Occurrence Snapshot, Infraction Code Summary, Multi-Year Suspension Report 3  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength : 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review report identified Indicator 4.2 Teacher Teams as a strength for our school citing, “The school has a structured program, so that teachers have opportunities to engage in structured professional collaborations through common planning periods, Monday professional learning periods, and data inquiry time." The report further cited, "Teacher teams review student work samples and discuss possible adjustments to practice to further support student learning." Other strengths include: -All teachers participate in Vertical Articulation Teams by content area to ensure coherence in instructional practices across the school. -Teacher teams share impact of best practices during school wide share fairs so that these best practices can be recognized and replicated throughout the school. Need : On the 2018 School Quality Guide multi-year summary, based on ratings provided by teachers, collaborative teachers’ element has been identified as an area of focus for the school, with a downward trend of 3.92 in 2015, 3.82 in 2016 , 3.54 in 2017 and 3.48 in 2018. Although, 86% of teachers agreed/strongly agreed that they receive support around how to incorporate students' cultural and linguistic backgrounds in their practice, this was one of our lowest rated areas. Only 64% of teachers agree that their professional development experience included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas. Only 64% of teachers report that their professional development experiences have been sustained and coherent. Priority Area : Further establishing, developing, & implementing Professional Learning Communities with a focus on improving teacher practice in order to increase student outcomes, with on a focus ELL students. Part 2 – Annual Goal 5  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of strategic design of our Professional Learning Plan at our Staff Development Committee meetings, there will be a 10% increase (from 64% to 74%) in the percentage of teachers “who agree or strongly agree that their professional development experience included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas,” as measured by the 2019 NYC School Survey results. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A year long school wide Professional Learning Plan for use of Monday PL sessions and Tuesday OPW time will be devised to reflect differentiated professional learning opportunities. This plan will be revised and updated by the Staff Development Team as necessary. All pedagogues September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Staff Development Team, Lead Teachers, Literacy Coach Professional Learning Cycle will focus on an exploration of ELL specific instructional strategies in order to make adaptations to existing curriculum. All Staff, including paraprofessionals September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Staff Development Team, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Literacy Coach September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Staff Development Team, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, November 2018-May 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Literacy Coach Administrators, Staff Development Team, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Literacy Coach, Parent Coordinator Administrators, Teachers, ENL providers, SETSS Teachers. AIS providers Subgroups of students (ELL & SWD) All Staff Teacher teams will engage in at least 2 cycles of the Data Action Phase model and will share learned practices and analyze the impact across grades. Provide workshops for cohorts of parents organized by need to offer specific at home support. Parents Establish a Parent ESL Class to support parents in English acquisition to better support their child at home. Students with Disabilities will be provided with support from a licensed Special Education teacher and English Language Learners will be provided PIPO support from an ENL specialist. Additional remediation will be provided for students in AIS during the school day or afterschool based on student performance. (Targeted groups ie: ELLs, SWDs, Lowest 3rd) ELL Students With Disabilities Students in need of academic support 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning September 2018 through June 2019, workshops will be presented to parents to describe and model effective strategies for supporting students at home. Retrain parents on how to effectively utilize online resources such as Brainpop and Benchmark Universe. Key personnel responsible for implementation of teachers, administration, parent coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Marvelous Monday Professional Development Block 2:20-3:40p.m. Other Professional Work Time Tuesday 3:00-3:30pm Common Prep/Linkage periods Planning time for Staff Development Committee/Vertical Planning Team Additional resources as necessary for various PLCs Resources and materials for Parent Workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of strategic design of our Professional Learning Plan at our Staff Development Committee meetings, 100% of teachers will have participated in professional development experiences which included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas,” as measured by the completion of one Cycle of Professional Learning and one Cycle of Data Action Phase inquiry. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 8  Attendance sheets, agendas, minutes and online Data Action Phase Data sharing of learning Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength : The 2017-2018 Principal's Performance Observation report notes indicator 3.1 as a strength citing, "Principal has a coherent vision through the development of targeted goals to promote school wide improvement." It was also cited, "Principal creates a positive school culture to promote the academic and emotional growth of students." June 2018 ADVANCE MOTP data indicates that overall 89.47% of all teachers are rated effective and/or Highly Effective for components 3b, 3c, and 3d. Need : The 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review again identified Quality indicator 1.2 (pedagogy) as an area of improvement citing the "school must continue to support instructional practice so that teachers strategically plan and implement lessons, in alignment with the school-wide instructional focus that meets the needs of all learners, promoting high levels of student thinking, participation and discussion." The school must continue to "work on the quality of the tasks that students are asked to complete, keeping in mind the level of engagement for students as well as ensuring that all students are cognitively engaged and supported.” It further cited that “It is critical that teachers use the information gathered (student learning data) to support students around specific skills and strategies. It further cited, "Classroom visits and a review of teacher planning documents indicate a need for additional support with a use of data to support instructional planning and execution." The EOY Advance Data Overview reflects a significant decline in teacher ratings for components 1a and 1e from year 2017 to 2018. 2017: 1a - 3.15 1e: 3.19 2018: 1a -2.98 1e: 2.95 On the 2018 School Quality Guide, based on ratings provided by teachers, rigorous instruction remains an area of focus for the school, although a recent increase from 3.55 in 2017 to 3.60 in 2018, there previously was a downward trend of 3.80 in 2015, 3.64 in 2016 and 3.55 in 2017. 0  As a result, our instructional focus for the 2018 – 2019 will continue to address the demands of ADVANCE MOTP 1e and 3c. Our school’s instructional focus for 2018-2019 remains: IF teachers carefully use student learning data to plan and implement lessons that meaningfully engage students in rigorous skills and content and give actionable feedback to students, THEN students will develop the critical thinking skills required to take leadership of their learning. Priority Area : School leaders will nurture the professional growth of teachers in order to drive student achievement and student ownership of their learning, with a particular focus on specific instructional moves for the ELL subgroup. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of strategic support from the administrative team, there will be a 3% (82% to 85%) increase in the percentage of teachers that receive an effective or highly effective rating in component 1e of the Danielson Framework as measured by the 2019 end of year summative ratings in Advance. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The administrative team will host one on one conferences with teachers to develop individualized MOTP related goals. All pedagogues September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, teachers A year long school wide Professional Learning Plan will be devised to reflect differentiated professional learning opportunities. This plan will be revised and updated by the Staff Development Team as necessary. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teachers, Staff Development Committee, Literacy Coach The administrative team will review Advance data from June 2018 and continuously throughout the 2018-2019 school year identify instructional gaps in order to differentiate and modify professional learning activities based on teacher needs. All Teachers August Principal 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal Intravisitations (on and off site) and other professional learning opportunities will be made available to teachers based on need determined by observations utilizing Danielson’s Framework for Teaching, as well as by teacher request for additional support. All teachers October 2018-April 2019 Administration will give verbal and/or written actionable feedback which will include research based strategies to instructionally support SWDs, ELLs and the students identified as the lowest third. All pedagogues September 2018-June 2019 School Leaders will use common planning periods monthly to provide grade-level specific professional learning sessions to support teachers in utilizing data to inform instructional decision making. All pedagogues September 2018-May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Staff Development Team, Lead Teachers, Literacy Coach Principal, Assistant Principal, Staff Development Team, Lead Teachers, Literacy Coach Principal, Assistant Principal, Staff Development Team, Lead Teachers, Literacy Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. October 2018 - June 2019 Teachers will utilize Parent-Engagement Tuesday block to offer at home strategies to support student learning. Key Personnel: All teachers, Paraprofessionals, Parent Coordinator, Literacy Coach, School Leaders Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Diem coverages to allow teachers to attend intervisitations Advance MOTP data Schedule adjustment to meet with teachers for observations conferences Danielson Framework Professional learning resources for staff Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of strategic support from the administrative team, there will be a 1.5% (82% to 83.5%) increase in the percentage of teachers that receive an effective or highly effective rating in component 1e of the Danielson Framework as measured by the MOTP ratings in Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance MOTP Progress Summary Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength: On the 2018 School Quality Guide we received a positive rating of 95% for the school's outreach to parents under Strong-Family Community Ties. Need: Although the school's outreach to parents was rated 95%, the school received a 89% positive rating of parent involvement in school. 75% of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often. (Q4a) Priority Area : Strengthen our efforts to offer opportunities for parents to support the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of more collaborative partnerships with families, there will be a 5% (from 75% to 80%) increase in the percentage of parents/guardians “who agree or strongly agree that since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school.," as measured by the Parent involvement sections of the NYC School Survey. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents  At the onset of the school year, use “Meet the Staff Night” as a vehicle to convey the importance of attendance at school wide events.  Translate key documents in parents’ home language  Provide an opportunity for parents to provide feedback on events Beginning September 2018 to June 2019 Administrators Teachers Parent Coordinator School Leadership Team members Utilize school website as a resource to communicate with parents about events. Parents September Establish a parent volunteer list and activity log to ensure that parents are including in the planning, preparation and execution of school events 2018 to June 2019 Administrators Parent Coordinator Parents September Administrators 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator Teachers School Leadership Team members Parents/guardians of all students, including SWDs and ELLs, will continue their participation in the following school activities: Parents September Administrators  Meet the Teacher Night (Sept.)  Effective use of “Terrific Tuesday” Parent Engagement Block: Learning Opportunities for Parents Student Led Conferences   Parent-Teacher Conferences (November, March and May) School Leadership Team   P.A. membership 2018 to June 2019 Teachers Parent Coordinator 5  Bi-Weekly Parent Workshops which addresses strategies for supporting sub-groups (ELLs, SWDs, Lowest Thirds) Literacy Night/Math Night/Family Night  Parent ENL Class   Open-School Week  Owl of the Month/Special Assemblies   Disney Musical in Schools Program  YPC Performances Frequent Progress Reports 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Young People's Chorus Disney Musical in Schools Leader in Me Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Classroom and out of classroom teachers including cluster, ENL, and Related Service Teachers Parent Coordinator workshops for parents Partnerships with Outside Agencies and Community Based Organizations Supplies and Materials for showcases and parent activities Per Session/Per diem coverages Technology upgrade to support online resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the administration will meet monthly with parent coordinator to report on and monitor the effectiveness and the impact upon improving family engagement opportunities offered to parents/guardians. 6  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly Calendars Parent Coordinator's Family Engagement Logs Parent Surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Results from BOY, MOY, EOY formative/summative assessments: F & P Benchmark Assessment; Ready Gen Comprehension Assessments; CCLS-Aligned PerformanceBased Assessments Retention history Results from BOY, MOY, EOY formative/summative assessments: enVisionsmath Beginning of Year assessments for K-2; CCLS-Aligned Periodic Assessment for grades 3-5; envisions unit tests Retention history Results from end of unit assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group instruction, one to one teacher support, push-in During the school day Small group instruction, one to one teacher support, push-in During the school day Small group instruction, one to one teacher support, push-in During the school day Fundations; Targeted skill instruction; close reading of complex texts; text dependent questions; targeted vocabulary instruction; interactive writing; shared and guided reading Exemplar problems; Use of manipulatives, modeling with math and solving abstract problems, problem of the day, all to promote repeated exposure to new concepts and skills in order to foster mastery Incorporation of non-fiction science books into the balanced literacy block; Increase in availability of leveled science texts; essential questions; hands on science exploration, use of 8 Small group instruction, one to one teacher support, push-in During the school day Small group, individual During the school day Social Studies Results from end of unit assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Services are provided according to mandates on individual student IEP’s and/or based on the recommendations for at-risk services from the PPT/SIT Team and Attendance Committee Ready Gen Science aligned-texts Incorporation of historical fiction and non-fiction history books into the balanced literacy block, use of Ready Gen social studies aligned texts; increase in availability of leveled texts in social studies; essential questions Related Services: Speech; Guidance; O/T; P/T; APE; SETSS. Counseling: academic and emotional School Psychologist: School related issues/crisis services Social Worker: Counseling School Nurse: Health, nutrition and asthma services 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 24 (3.7%) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population.  At-Risk Counseling services from guidance counselor  Book bags with instructional supplies as needed   End of year "Summer Bridge" workbooks will be provided to each student to decrease summer slippage School Uniforms, as needed Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: Use New Teacher Finder and/or attend Hiring Fairs to identify eligible candidates to screen, interview & conduct demo lessons. Assignments: Fully licensed teachers will be hired and assigned to their licensed area. Retention:  New teachers are matched to mentor teachers for continued guidance and support in an effort to retain new teachers on staff.  New teachers will receive 6-8 weeks of individualized support from the Assistant Principal.  Team Leaders are available to provide grade specific support to new teachers.  Intra-visitations allow new teachers to observe best practices and to form networking relationships with colleagues within the school.  Professional learning opportunities for new teacher focus on the implementation of CCLS and Danielson Framework for Teaching.  Ongoing and differentiated Continued Teacher Education opportunities will be provided for tenured staff  Teacher Leader opportunities will be made available Support: All teachers will participate in one to one conferences with school leadership with a focus on improving their instructional craft to increase student achievement. 2  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Pedagogues set measurable goals for their professional growth. Differentiated professional development opportunities will be provided to nurture and support growth. Pedagogues will be offered & encouraged to attend off-site professional development opportunities through various resources Inter-visitations to allow teacher to observe best practices. Professional Development Activities include but are not limited to:  Analyzing student data and student work to determine needed changes in the delivery of instruction.  Participating in reviews of class performance data over time to make decisions about one's own professional development, based on student outcomes  Collaborating with other teachers to examine case studies of student work and development  Participating in courses and other learning opportunities delivered from many providers, such as institutions of higher education, school districts and independent professional development service providers.  Workshops linked to improvement of instructional technique or content knowledge.  Engaging in research projects (includes online research)  Curriculum planning and development  Developing or collaborating on the development of new programs and instructional methods    Participation in study (collegial) circles such as "Critical Friends" activities, structured guided reflection Service as a mentor, support teacher, helping teacher, or peer coach Service as a cooperating teacher for a student teacher or field internships activities focused on student learning Instructional moves to support English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students With Disabilities (SWDs)  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 3  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Open houses/orientations will be held for incoming students & their parents. Meetings will be conducted with students residing in temporary housing. CSE Reviews for transitioning & turning 5 students are held for parents. Mandated services are put in place for all incoming students with IEPs. Curriculum Night (Back to School) held in the Fall for all parents. Monthly Parents as Partners events allow for parent involvement in all classrooms. School Guidance Counselor supports students in overcoming transitional challenges and anxieties. Classroom teachers hold weekly parent teacher conferences during the Terrific Tuesday Parent Engagement block. Parent Coordinator hosts bi-weekly parent workshops to support new parents School Implementation Team (SIT) meets bi-monthly to discuss and devise action plans for students in need of support. Academic Intervention Services (AIS) will be provided to address academic deficiencies. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Grade meetings are held with teachers & administration to analyze student data & plan for informal & formal assessments. Teachers are engaged in the inquiry process where they identify trends and patterns using summative and formative assessments. Teachers then analyze assessments results to identify gaps in meeting the expectations of the CCLS and align instruction to best address student needs. Teachers work collaboratively to identify strengths and weaknesses across the grade. Teachers use conference notes, teacher-created assessments, program assessments and observation to determine revisions on the unit plans. Small group targeted instruction are determined based on these multiple lenses. Progress monitoring is conducted in all subject areas On-going differentiated professional development will be provided focusing on assessment tools being utilized for monitoring student progress. Staff Development Committee/Vertical Planning Committee meets regularly with administration to allow teachers to have a voice in instructional decisions. 4  Teacher Inquiry Teams will share the impact of their work with the school community so that best practices can be replicated throughout the school. MOSL Committee decides on the selection of the MOSL assessments to be used as part of teacher evaluations 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 5 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 276,291.00 96,974.00 17,614.00 10,302.00 3,409,434.00 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e Sections 5a,5b, 5c, 5d, 5e Sections 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e Sections 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e Sections 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e  used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 64 Joseph P. Addabbo School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 64 Joseph P. Addabbo School, will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 7  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 8  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Meet the Staff Night; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable I the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 64 Joseph P. Addabbo School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 9  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 0  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 1  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: After analyzing the NYSESLAT, NYS ELA and NYS Math scores and TCRWP Benchmarks, we determined that PS 64 will implement an after school program to provide additional support for our current English Language Learners. 2017-2018 NYS ELA & NYS MATH 2017-2018 NYSESLAT Our Rigorous Instruction goal for the 2018-2019 school year is to improve the reading proficiency level for our subgroup of ELL learners. With that, our ENL After School Program will serve approximately 75 ELLs in grades 3, 4, and 5. The program will be targeted for differentiated, small group instruction by NYSESLAT levels. The program will be taught by our 3 NYS certified ENL teachers. The after school program will take place from January 2019 to April, 2019 for 32 sessions. It will be from 2:20-4:00pm (1 hour 40 minutes session) every Wednesday and Thursday in English, with one session dedicated to ELA and the other for Math. We anticipate that a supervisor will be hired through Title III funds to oversee the program exclusively. To prepare our ELL students for the NYS ELA and Math exams, ELA and Math Workbooks will be purchased using Title III funds to be used exclusively for the duration of the ELL After School Program. Math manipulatives will be used as well as technology-based learning including World Book, Smart Boards and laptops to further differentiate instruction. Bilingual resources (glossaries and dictionaries) will be purchased to support of ELLs in Grade 3-5. Title III funds will also be used to purchase NYSESLAT Preparation workbooks to support instruction during the school day. Additionally, some Title III funds will be used to purchase materials for ELL Family Literacy classes and/or workshops. All relevant records ( job postings, student attendance, program notification in parents' preferred languages, etc) will be maintained in the Principal's Office in the Title III binder. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development is an integral component of the PS 64 school community. We have been focused on establishing a culture which conveys an understanding that "All teachers are teachers of ELLs." 4  Part C: Professional Development Our ENL teachers employ both a stand-alone and an integrated model of instruction to support all our ELL students. Common planning time is afforded to ENL teachers and their collaborative partners. This is necessary for all staff members as they are all teachers of ELLs. Professional development sessions are used to align our curriculum to the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers and their collaborative partners meet to plan for instruction and to infuse ENL methodology and strategies into the curriculum. Ongoing professional development will be conducted throughout the school year during the Monday Professional Development Block. These sessions will be conducted by our ENL teachers, General Education teachers, Administrators and outside providers. These Professional Learning sessions allow the ENL teachers and classroom teachers to plan collaboratively. ENL teachers will participate in weekly inquiry process of looking at student work to note implications for improving their professional practice. Additionally, teachers will attend professional development sessions and conferences offered by the Office of English Language Learners, Queens South FSC ELL Leadership Institute, as well as other educational organizations. Documentation of staff development sessions for ELLs conducted within our school is maintained through sign in sheets and professional development agendas Addiitonally, our second Professional Learning Cycle for the year will engage all teachers, including ENL teachers in CurriculumAdaptation & Planning: Differentiation of learning tasks based on students’ English proficiency levels. Teachers attending these workshops will turnkey the information to other staff members. The following is a list of tentative Professional Learning opportunities the ENL teachers will attend: Universal Design for Learning (UDL) November 2018 80 minutes Danielson's Framework for Teaching September-October 2018 45 minutes sessions Reading and Writing for ELLs, Scaffolding for Success November 2018 (4) 80 minutes sessions Algebra for All Math Institute for Elementary Teachers Ongoing Full day Understanding Linguistic, Cultural and Academics of ESL/Bilingual Students with Disabilities NYSITELL Training TBD Instructional Classroom Strategies for ELLs and Students with Disabilities Novemember 2018 (4) 80 minutes sessions Administering and Scoring the NYSESLAT March 2019 All relevant records (agendas, attendance sheets, etc) will be maintained in the Principal's Office in the Title III binder. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent involvement at PS64Q, including parents of ELLs, is a key focus. All parents, including those of ELLs participate in a parent orientation several times a year. First, at the beginning of the school year, and then at various times throughout the school year. They are informed about Math, NYSESLAT, ELA, and Science state tests; testing exemptions for new ELLs; testing accommodations for all ELLs; and the promotional policy for ELLs via letter, parents meetings. 5  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities The needs of parents are evaluated in informal and formal ways through parent-teacher conferences, meetings, workshops, surveys, school events, PTA meetings, etc. The educators and administrators listen and have a conversation with parents, and try to answer their questions and concerns. Parents always add valuable information about their children, their background, strengths and weaknesses, behavior and academic work, as well as their socio-economic situation. We work cooperatively with them, and make student referrals for different services according to the students’ needs. Our bilingual Parent Coordinato, in cooperation with the classroom teachers and parent volunteers, send home notices translated into three languages: English, Bengali and Spanish. This will foster a sense of security with the family and help them feel comfortable and confident in communicating with our school. In September, the Parent Coordinator sends out a Parent Needs Survey. Based on that Survey, we have scheduled the following workshops: Workshop Presenter Month Student Led Conferences Students & Teachers Sept. -June Homework Help K-2 ENL Teachers September Homework Help 3-5 ENL Teachers October Fundations Workshop K-2 Marla Goldstein, ENL Teacher October Title I Meeting Elizabeth Mitchell, Principal October Breast Cancer Workshop Child Health Plus October ESL Classes for Parents (2x weekly) Joanne Ramirez, Parent Coordinator Oct-June Middle School Process Elena Chin, Guidance October Nutrition Workshops (6 weeks) Cornell University Oct-Jan Asthma Workshop Child Health Plus November Keep Tracking Dial A Teacher November Depression and Anxiety Elena Chin, Guidance November What Is Thanksgiving? Joanne Ramirez, Parent Coordinator November Stress Management Child Health Plus December Holiday Customs & Crafts Joanne Ramirez, Parent Coordinator December Middle School Application Elena Chin, Guidance December Math Games K-2 ENL Teachers January From Stress to Success Sylvan Learning Center January Heart Disease Workshop Child Health Plus February Valentine Customs & Crafts Joanne Ramirez , Parent Coordinator February ELA Exam Workshop Principal/Asst. Principal March NYC School Survey Joanne Ramirez, Parent Coordinator March NYS Math Test Success Principal/Asst. Principal March/April Healthy Child Workshop Child Health Plus April Understanding the NYSESLAT ENL Teachers April Cultural Festival Kindergarten Students and Teachers May Family Night Staff May Immigration Research & Celebration Grade 4 Students & Teachers June Transition from Elementary to Middle School Elena Chin, Guidance June Summer Safety Joanne Ramirez June At each activity, the Parent Coordinator attends to orally translate into Spanish. We also have parent volunteers who orally translate into Bengali. All workshops are listed on our monthly calendars and school website. Additionally, parents are notified about all activities through notices sent home via student backpacks. Throughout the year, documents requiring translation are forwarded to the Parent Coordinator and the DOE Translation Unit. 6 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities The DOE telephone Translation Unit is utilized during conferences requiring Urdu, Mandarin, Pashto, or Arabic translations. Our Parent Coordinator greets all K-1 arriving students each morning at our school entrance. She calls parents at home and extends personal invitations to some targeted students for Workshops and/or special events. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name The Joseph P. Addabbo School Borough Queens School Number 064 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Elizabeth Mitchell Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jannatun Provati Teacher/Subject Area Denise Spoto Teacher/Subject Area Marla Goldstein Related-Service Provider Carol Delgaudio (Speech) Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal Kim Gori-Rizzo Coach N/A School Counselor Elena Chin Parent type here Parent Coordinator Joanne Ramirez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Iris Cueto-Anglaril ENL Teache C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 8  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 655 Total number of ELLs 185 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 28.24% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Bangla If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017 K 14 14 1 2 3 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 14 0 0 0 0 0 14 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. The assessments used at the school-level are TCRWP, Fountas and Pinnel guided reading levels, Fundations, and informal assessments. Some informal assessments used at the school are; Exit Slips, conferencing notes as well as unit tests. After careful analysis of this data ENL teachers are able to determine sight word recognition, letter and sound identification and spelling skills. K-5 ENL teachers can determine individual reading levels, reading fluency, decoding and concepts of print mastery. In addition, all grades will be administering Ready Gen baseline as our RTI universal screener. This will help grade teams determine student instructional needs and establish starting points for learning. The TCRWP and Fundations data helps teachers make instructional decisions targeting student individual needs, such as; grouping students according to skill and reading levels, recommending AIS to those students who are performing below grade level during the school day, as well as during extended day programs. 9  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have formed data inquiry teams that meet in cycles. These teams consist of general education, special education and ENL teachers, who work together to research methodologies and strategies needed to individualize instruction for ELLs. We've also established Vertical Articulation Teams which consist of one teacher from each grade where collaborative professional discussions occur to ensure that ELL students have common instructional supports coherently across grades. These teams meet bimonthly to discuss results and next steps. Additionally, all teachers receive common planning periods built into their programs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We primarily evaluate the success of our ENL Program based on the scores our students receive on the NYSESLAT, and students moving one or more proficiency levels or individual modalities. Success is also measured through movement of TCRWP reading levels throughout the school year as well as Ready Gen performance tasks. We also review benchmarks and State test scores to inform instruction for the following year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data has been gathered, those students considered "At Risk" are identified. Based on this data analysis, classroom teachers target their "FAB Five" students to provide targeted, small group instruction. Within the classroom setting, the teachers form flexible groups of students with similar needs to provide targeted intervention (TIER I) throughout the year. Students at risk receive AIS services. Our AIS program includes ELLs across all grades. Afterschool or Saturday Academy programs are available for all ELLs from grades 3-5 as a supplemental support. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school uses the F& P benchmark system three times a year to guide instruction for ELLs within the Tier I of the Response To Intervention Framework. Within the K -2 grades the Fundations program, along with unit assessments to inform teachers of students mastery. For grades 3-5, the AIS provided utilizes Wilson Reading Intervention. In grade 3-5 students performing below two grade levels in reading, as per TCRWP Independent Reading levels are identified as in need of reading intervention. is used as needed to instruct decoding and comprehension skills. There are unit assessments to inform the classroom teachers of the students’ mastery. Results are used to re-teach concepts and form new groups according to mastery or non-mastery. the skills to those students until they are mastered. In grades K-5 ENL teachers form ELL groups according to language ability and incorporate targeted skills as per assessment results in daily lessons. For each lesson, exit slips and checklists are used to gather data and guide instruction. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers create flexible groups for each lesson according to students' abilities. ENL teachers examine student achievement at classroom levels and we draw on multiple sources of information including classroom teacher, ELL teacher, and child’s PBA’s. We analyze data through a language acquisition lens, then both ENL and classroom teachers design and implement targeted supplemental supports. Student progress is monitored over time. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The analysis of the NYSESLAT proficiency levels help to determine the areas of strengths and weaknesses of our ELLs in all grades. In addition, the ELA and Math, periodic assessments and benchmark data are used to evaluate and inform our ENL program. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL teachers review the RLAT exam report and use this information to form groups and identify strengths and weaknesses. The data received from TCRWP benchmark allows the formation of more specific targeted groupings throughout the year. 0  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. PS 64 utilizes a free standing ESL program. All classes are heterogeneously grouped in a combination of Integrated and Stand-alone programs. Emerging and Entering students are serviced 360 minutes a week. Transitioning and Expanding students are serviced 180 minutes a week. Commanding students are serviced 90 minutes per week. ENL services are provided by three ENL teachers who are each assigned two-grade bands. ENL teachers work in collaboration with classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support through core content. ENL teachers work with students of mixed proficiency levels during the integrated model.(cid:173)(cid:173) The Standalone Model is delivered in grade level bands of Entering and Emerging students. During both the Integrated and the Standlone models some groups are formed with students in contiguous grades. b. TBE program. If applicable. In the 2017/2018 school year we opened a TBE Bengali kindergarten class. There are 14 students in this class. The students are instructed in Bengali and English using the 60/ 40 split and the transition to more English as needed. As per CR-154 .2 Entering/Emerging students receive 180 minutes of ENL/ELA intergrated per week, plus 180 additional minutes stand alone/ELA to equal 360 minutes c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Integrated periods are allotted during ELA and other content area instruction. P.S. 64 ENL teachers collect data from ATS reports such as the R-LAT and the NYSITELL to identify each students mandated number of instructional minutes according to their proficiency levels. The three ENL teachers service students in two to three contiguous grades grouped according to their proficiency levels or heterogenous groups. Stand alone and integrated periods will be scheduled as mandated by CRPart 154.2. ENL and ELA/content area instructional minutes are delivered by ENL teachers who meet staffing requirements. Three ENL teachers are ESOL certified with two holding common branch certifications. All instructional hours are logged in Stars and updated as needed. HLA in the Kindergaten is delivered by the classroom teacher. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. PS 64 uses the ENL program model for grades K-5. For the current school year 2017-2018 we have opened a Bengali TBE class. In the ENL Program model, core content is delivered using English as the primary language of instruction with some native language support when translations or interpretations are available. ENL teachers scaffold content areas to support ENL instructional strategies. Stand-alone ENL instruction is delivered by a certified ENL teacher in a pull-out model emphasizing English language acquisition and vocabulary support. ENL teachers and classroom teachers are provided common preparation periods allowing them to work collaboratively to plan content area instruction using ENL methodologies through picture support, peer support, and technology following the Integrated and Stand-alone model. Our students come from diverse backgrounds with English being the common language, therefore English is the language of instruction. Tasks are enriched with academic English language development resources such as; library resources in the home language , technology, and ENL strategies; ensuring curricular alignment. 1  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The Spanish LAB-R is administered to incoming students who speak Spanish. Interpretors are hired for the NYS Math and Science exams for those students whose native language is not supplied with written translations. Interpretors are used to interview and evaluate for SIFE identification. Translations which are available in the native language are supplied for those students who need them. In the classroom, the Envisions Math program offers the unit tests in Spanish for those speakers. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE- During common planning time classroom and ENL teachers prepare goals for SIFE students with targeted learning objectives weaved into classroom lessons and activities; as well as support in a specified language. The SIFE students are also invited to the afterschool program. b.Newcomer- Newcomer instruction is differentiated by using more visual support, realia, dictionaries, smartboards, tablets, hands -on interactions and native language support with help from peers. TPR instruction is added to facilitate language acquisition. c. Developing-Instruction is further differentiated to include all of the above with additional supports. These supports include Computer programs such as Starfall, Read Naturally, Khan Academy Math, leveled readers using Reading A-Z. Writing instruction is supported by differentiated graphic organizer, sentence frames and sentence stems. d.Long Term-Currently PS 64 does not have any long term ELLs. e. Former ELLsThese students receive continued ENL support for 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction per week. Instruction is provided in content areas. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies used for the ELL-SWDs that support IEP goals and objectives include visual support such as pictures, big books, vocabulary charts and manipulatives for math and the use of the Fundation and Wilison programs. Leveled readers and differentiated graphic organizers are implemented according to needs of students. In addition, small group instruction is also used focusing on different learning styles such as tactile, auditory and visual. Technology used are tablets, laptops and smart-boards. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ENL teachers push into ICT classes after collaborating with the classroom teachers. ENL teachers push in to work with ELL-SWD's receiving SETSS during the Integrated model. The nature of an ICT class allows for flexible programming and flexible grouping so that all children are in mainstream situations for most of the day. Curiculum maps are created by all grade teams with ELL/SWD strategies added. 2  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All intervention programs are offered in English at PS 64. As per Title III, we offer an ENL afterschool program for ELLs in ELA and math. We also offer Saturday Academy. These programs target ELLs in grades 3-5 in all proficiency levels. PS 64 incorporates RTI services for struggling students. Tier- I services are provided through classroom instruction with integrated ENL support, which includes scaffolding and differentiation. Tier II - AIS pull-out support is provided by an intervention specialist as determined by the Student Intervention Team. The team meets monthly to monitor progress and discuss next steps. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue to implement the Reading A_Z program with a focus on the ELL component, to improve the fluency and comprehension of our ELLs. The new CR Part 154.2 mandates include the Integrated and Stand-alone models. For the 2018-2019 school year P.S. 64 will implement the DOE's newly developed Alternative Pathways to support former ELL's language development and academic progress. Our Bengali TBE Class will be continued for the 2018/2019 school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students in grades 3-5 are invited to the afterschool program for ELA and Math as well as the Saturday Academy. All students in grade 3 learn to play the recorder and are afforded the opportunity to perform at Carnegie Hall. All students in grades 3-5 can audition for the Young People's Chorus program as well as Disney musical theatre. The students have the opportuinty to apply to be part of a student lighthouse team(TLIM) as well as the afterschool garden club. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Smartboards and laptops are used in the classrooms to support ELLs. Small group guided reading lessons are tailored to ELLs with F&P leveled books. Rigby's On Our Way to English guided reading program is used for Ell stand alone and integrated instruction. Read Naturally computer program supports ELL's comprehension, decoding skills and reading fluency. Envisions math program videos are shown to explain the current math content, along with manipulatives to help students. Hands on science experiments are incorporated into the curriculum. We offer books and dictionaries in students NL 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In ENL, home language is supported in different ways. Ms. Cueto-Anglarill speaks fluent Spanish, so she interprets/translates academic language, assessments and content material as needed. Ms. Jannatun Provati, TBE teacher, speaks fluent Bengali and interprets/translates academic language and content material as needed. Some students have a NL buddy in their classroom. ENL teachers utilize translation services and various internet translation websites to support HL during academic lessons. We also use staff members such as paras and school aides to help with translation when needed to communicate with parents and students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services and resources are appropriated from ATS reports such as R-LAT, RLER, RELC, RYOS and YURI. The ENL teachers also review NYSESLAT, NYSITELL scores to ensure mandated minutes are allotted to each student. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 3  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New parent orientation meetings are held, as well as outreach supplied by our parent coordinator Joanne Ramirez. We also offer transitioning support from our guidance counselor Elena Chin. The parent coodinator and ENL teachers conduct monthly parent workshops such as Homework Help, How to read to your child, and Understanding the NYSESLAT. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teachers attend PD given on Mondays as per UFT contractual agreement. P.S. 64 ensures that all teachers are provided with the allotted 15% of required professional development hours which are dedicated to language acquisition. In addition, 50% or more of the required professional development hours for ENL teachers will be dedicated to integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Calendar of PD dates for the 2018-2019 school year are yet to be determined. We have formed a Professional Learning Community to collaboratively discuss and implement reading strategies for all students, including ENL students. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Sign in and attendance sheets as well as an agenda of the workshops are kept in the principals office for record keeping.. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ENL teachers will use Parent Engagement Tuesdays as an opportunity to meet with individual parents. At this time, the ENL teacher will discuss goals of the ENL program, results of their child's NYSITELL/NYSESLAT, and language development in all content areas. Ms. Cueto-Anglarill will conduct bilingual Spanish/English conferences. All other languages needed will use the staff on site for translation services. The ENL teachers have created a parent engagement log to keep track of all individualized meetings and discussions held within. 4  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELL students are members of our school leadership team, are active members of our parent association, are invited to school performances such as the chorus shows and all school assemblies honoring student acheivement. Parents participate in class trips, cultural festivals held by kindergarten and 4th grade. The translation unit provides translated flyers advertising all special activities. All meetings and orientations offer interpretors as needed by trained parent volunteers and staff. ELL parents are part of the volunteer program which allows them to participate in making costumes, working with the school store and working at fund raisers such a candy sales and picture day. Parents and their children are invited to participate in P.S. 64's Garden Club with Ms. Rystadt and Ms. Goldstein. Through a grant awarded to Ms. Dunlop, Multimedia/Literacy cluster, parents were invited to join their children in "Family Fun Equals Parent Participation for New ELLs". Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Elizabeth Mitchell, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Joseph P. Addabbo School School DBN: 27Q064 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Elizabeth Mitchell Title Principal Kim Gori Rizzo Assistant Principal Joanne Ramirez Parent Coordinator Jannatun Provati ENL/Bilingual Teacher N/A Parent Marla Goldstein Teacher/Subject Area Iris Cueto-Anglarill Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Elena Chin School Counselor N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Denis Spoto Other ENL Teacher Carol Delgaudio Other Speech Teacher N/A Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 61118 61118 61118 61118 N/A 61118 61118 N/A N/A 61118 N/A N/A 61118 61118 N/A 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q064 School Name: The Joseph P. Addabbo School Superintendent: Mary Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Joanne Ramirez Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 days from students entering with IEPs). The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent's preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE's over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative high quality translation service (usually a parent volunteer). Parents complete a Student Emergency Contact cards on which they indicate their preferred language of communication. School makes every effort to communicate to parent in their preferred language. 8  Our Language Access Coordinator, Pupil Accounting Secretary and ENL teachers regularly generate and review up-to-date ATS reports which include preferred language for parents in our school community. Such reports include: RAPL, RCPL, RHLA, RPOB 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Bengali Spanish Urdu Arabic Chinese (any) Mandarin Indonesian (Aka Bahasa) Burmese Romanian 463 195 98 6 6 3 0 0 1 0 59.97 25.26 12.69 0.78 0.78 0.39 0 0 0.13 0 412 241 102 6 5 2 1 1 1 1 53.37 31.22 13.21 0.78 0.65 0.26 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.13 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Parent Letters ongoing Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. bilingual staff, DOE Translation Unit, DOE Vendor "The BIG Word" 9  Report Cards November, March Parent Workshops notices Monthly Grade level expectations September Grading policy September Title I documents October Student-specific documents ongoing After-school documents ongoing Principal's Letters ongoing Critical DOE Documents ongoing bilingual staff, DOE Translation Unit, DOE Vendor "The BIG Word" bilingual staff, Parent Volunteers, DOE Vendor "The BIG Word" DOE translation unit, DOE Vendor "The BIG Word" DOE translation unit, DOE Vendor "The BIG Word" Staff members, DOE translations unit, DOE Vendor "The BIG Word" DOE Translation Unit, bilingual staff, purchased translation tools (glossaries, dictionaries), DOE Vendor "The BIG Word" DOE Translation Unit, bilingual staff, DOE Vendor "The BIG Word" DOE Translation Unit, bilingual staff, DOE Vendor "The BIG Word" Access already translated documents on the DOE's website, DOE Vendor "The BIG Word", DOE Translation Unit, bilingual staff 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Orientations Sept/Oct. and monthly as needed Tuesday Parent Engagement Time Every Tuesday September -June Parent Workshops Monthly 1:1 Parent Meetings ongoing Parent Teacher Conferences November, January, May interpretation service(s)? Bilingual Staff, DOE Interpretation Unit, use of audio interpretation units Bilingual Staff, DOE Interpretation Unit, use of audio interpretation units Bilingual Staff, DOE Interpretation Unit, use of audio interpretation units parent volunteers, school staff as needed Bilingual Staff, DOE Interpretation Unit, use of audio interpretation units parent volunteers, school staff as needed Bilingual Staff, DOE Interpretation Unit, and Contracted DOE vendor service 0  Meet the school Night/Family Night September & May Bilingual Staff, DOE Interpretation Unit, use of audio interpretation units 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Telephone Calls using information on Blue Cards. Calls are made by bilingual staff. School uses SchoolCNXT telephone app which translates messages into the parents preferred home language. Many classroom teachers use CLASS DOJO web application to communicate with parents. We utilize the Over-The-Phone Interpretation Service when there is insufficient school personnel available. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the onset of the school year, a staff orientation is held and principal reviews key including Chancellor's Regulations A-663 . Principal will include the responsibilities of staff when communicating with LEP parents and inform them of resources available to them for support. Principal disseminates weekly Monday Message highlighting best practices CR A-663 . Language Access Coordinator will provide a professional learning session on CR-663 during the school year. Some guidelines offered during training:  Explain to the interpreter the purpose of the communication and provide a description of the information to be conveyed;  Provide brief explanations of technical terms that may come up during the communication;  Avoid using acronyms.   Express one idea at a time and allow the information to be interpreted prior to continuing;  Check in with the interpreter to make sure he/she is understanding what you’re saying because if he/she Speak in short sentences; doesn’t then how he/she translates the information may be confusing to the LEP person;  Avoid using double negatives;  Enunciate words;  Refrain from use of contractions;  If in person: talk to the LEP person and not to the interpreter. In other words, face the LEP person and look at him/her and not the interpreter;  Be patient Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 1  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..)  In our main lobby and throughout the school, we've conspicuously posted signs such as Welcome Posters and "I Speak" cards in each of the most prominent languages in our school to create an environment in which parents are aware of and understand how to access language assistance services.  Principal sends an internal letter to school staff reminding them of their responsibility to communicate with LEP parents and what resources are available to support them (T&I Unit, bilingual staff, DOE Vendor service, parent volunteer)  Parents are provided with : A copy of Parents Bill of Rights, Copy of Achieve NYC Guide, A copy of Parent Guide to Language Access   Consistently have printed materials available in the main office, such as: Parents Bill of Rights, Achieve NYC Guide, Parent Guide to Language Access, school brochures, flyers, letters and other important documents. School has invested in a translation audio unit which parents sign-out for meetings and receive simultaneous translations by interpreters during the meetings. School staff uses telephone conference as well as a two-way handset telephone splitter to allow teacher, parent and translator to be on the same call at the same time.   We utilize services from the DOE vendor "THE BIG Word" for languages not covered by school personnel.  We utilize the Over-The-Phone Interpretation Service when there is insufficient school personnel available. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 1. Language Access Coordinator will monitor and update the school's LTI plan on an ongoing basis. 2. Language Access Coordinator will track the language assistance requested and provided. The purpose is to determine language needs of those accessing and seeking to access information and how well we were able to satisfy these needs. 3. Language Access Coordinator will annually review the demographics of the school population to make sure that we are meeting the needs of our school community. If new demographic data is revealed, we will review the data and implement accordingly (i.e., adjust our efforts and update this plan to reflect changes). 4. We have a suggestion box in our Main Lobby inviting all families and visitors to offer suggestions that will improve our school. 5. Language Access Coordinator will consider sharing a parent survey to request feedback from families. 2 
