 27Q066 School Name: P.S. 066 JACQUELINE KENNEDY ONASSIS Principal: HELEN DESARIO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis 27Q066 342700010066 Pre-K-5 School Number (DBN): 85-11 102 Street Richmond Hill, NY 11418 718-558-2810 Phone Number: 718-558-2815 Fax: Helen DeSario hdesario@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Helen DeSario Marygrace O’Gara Maria Acero Gina Puzio AngelNieves N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 27 Ms. Jennifer Ambert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd. Ozone Park, NY 11416 Superintendent’s Office Address: jambert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5800 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens South Field Support Center FSC: Ms. Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd. Ozone Park, NY 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-281-3259 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Helen DeSario Marygrace O’Gara Maria Acero Christine Francavilla Angel Nieves AngelNieves Miriam Fernandez Maria Rodriguez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent/PAC Chairperson Parent Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) ChristineMiller GinaPuzio Cristina Delgaldo Teacher Teacher Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We envision our school as a community of learners where all members, students, teachers, and parents, are actively engaged in the educational process. Educators and parents, as equal partners, are focused on empowering all students with the academic skills and rich civic and social experiences that will enable them to further their educational goals and become active, responsible, and contributing members of society. All standards are intended to help bring students to high levels of performance to meet the rigors and demands of life in the 21 st century. We want to remain a high performing school that engages all students in exemplary teaching and learning experiences that are   rigorous, differentiated, and meaningful. We are committed to prepare all students as they begin their journey toward becoming college and career ready. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 66 Queens is a diverse, collaborative school community dedicated to achieving high standards of academic excellence in all subject areas for all of our students. In partnership with families and community, the mission of PS 66 is to remain a high performing school that engages all students in exemplary teaching and learning experiences that are rigorous, differentiated, and meaningful. Our goal is to educate and support students as they begin their journey toward becoming college and career ready. Through high quality, standards-driven instruction, a nurturing environment and the development of civic, social, and technological skills, our students will become productive members of the global society. PS 66 is a small neighborhood school providing education for 495 students from Pre-K-5th grade. Our greatest assets are our teachers and their dedication to our children. One hundred percent of the teachers are state certified and licensed. The school staff has maintained strong ties to the ethnically-diverse parent community. Our students encompass a variety of ethnic and racial backgrounds resulting in a sense of tolerance and respect that permeates throughout the building. We continue to welcome a large number of children who are English Language Learners. One reason for our historical success is the continued dialogue between staff and parents. This is accomplished through the PTA, Parent Coordinator, and a cohesive School Leadership Team. Students develop important decision-making, critical thinking, and technological skills, and the ability to communicate effectively. All students know what is expected and the school is organized for effort. In this regard, PS 66 establishes high expectations for achievement that are well understood by the students, parents and teachers. An Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ICT) class on each grade provides academic support to students with disabilities . The teachers work collaboratively throughout the day to adapt and modify instruction for the students making sure the entire class has access to the curriculum. Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS teachers) provide additional services to students with IEPs. Professional development is given in order to ensure teachers are using the latest strategies or methods to achieve success and meet all goals. Professional development is coordinated by the teachers, who work together to combine ideas on effective planning, on different ways to assess learning, on developing curricula and instructional materials, and assessing teachers’ own needs for professional development. Teachers share and learn from each other, providing best practices in order to improve student outcomes. When success is achieved at PS 66 Q, it is recognized and celebrated through commendation, exhibition of work, and praise.  We celebrate the Student of the Month by recognizing an outstanding student from each class.  We recognize perfect attendance  An awards assembly is held annually recognizing students growth and achievement  Positive behavior is rewarded school wide with bucket bucks that can be used at our school store  All grades are participating in the Nalini Kids Program, which is a Social Emotional program to improve the lives of students both physically and emotionally  We participate in The Jets Upstander of the Month that recognizes good citizenship and provides students with family Jets tickets The school staff organizes Arts Collaborations to enrich curriculum. 0 "Young Audiences" presentations are linked to social studies and other areas in the humanities. School trips to museums and other cultural institutions are planned throughout the year.    A "LEAP" professional teaching artist introduced diverse literary genres and taught students to make inferences, analyze plot, character, and mood, extended the meaning of a story and predicted outcomes. Students created cartoons, dramatic performances, and books based on their interpretations or extensions of the original literary works. Another LEAP artist helped make the classroom a living museum as students learned American history through a variety of hands on projects.  Through a variety of texts, we link social studies to multi-cultural and heritage studies (i.e.: Black History Month, Women’s History, Hispanic History, etc.)  Native American Museum Walk: after studying Native Americans, the fifth grade students prepare a “museum” of artifacts, models, etc., for the entire school to visit.  Community events aid our success in all areas. Our Multicultural Day provides parents, staff, and students with an opportunity to share information about heritage, customs and food in a collegial manner. During our Career Day, parents discuss with students their various careers including education needed, training, etc.  Our S.T.E.A.M. Fair showcases our educational approach to learning science, technology, engineering, the arts, and mathematics through innovative and interactive projects on display created by student  The Midori Music program provides a high quality music education for our students that culminates in student showcases and allows them to experience music first hand We have established an attendance initiative based on last year’s attendance data. Any child that was absent 10 or more days in 2017 – 2018 is categorized as “At Risk.” Every “At Risk” student is assigned a mentor teacher. The teacher is responsible for meeting with the student periodically, calling the home when he/she is absent and providing positive feedback when the student is succeeding. The importance of attendance is clear. Students need to be present in school to benefit from the curriculum, and to meet academic expectations and other requirements. In order to encourage civic responsibilities and service to the community, our fifth grade participates in many senior activities:  Alex’s Lemonade Stand: the students sell Lemonade to the entire school to raise money for children with  cancer with funds going to the Alex’s Lemonade Stand Foundation Juvenile Diabetes walk to raise money for children with diabetes donated to Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation  Breast cancer bagel breakfast (think pink): to raise awareness and make a donation through Panera Bread's fund raising initiative.  Annual Food Drive: the entire school brings in canned/boxed products to be donated to the Elohim Food Pantry on 111 Street.  Operation Gratitude: a program where students collect and donate their Halloween candy to soldiers on active duty. We also write letters to our troops overseas showing our appreciation  Toys for tots: students donate toys to those children less fortunate  Holiday Cheer for Troops: students write letters to our Troops overseas to thank them and provide some cheer during the holidays Our student council representatives meet monthly to discuss and propose initiatives made by their classmates. This provides students the opportunity to participate in the democratic process and make decisions related to the school. This year, the student council collected an abundance of pet supplies to donate to a local animal shelter. Each morning our administration greets the staff and students and invites a different student each day to read the morning announcements. We have been honored with the following awards: 1        In 2013, we achieved the National Blue Ribbon In 2012, we were one of the Ten Best Schools in NYC In 2012, we were a NYS Reward School In 2009, we were honored with the Title I school of Distinction Award From 2009-2014, we received an “A” on NYC’s Progress Report In 2008, we were recognized by the State and the City as a Title I school of distinction for exceeding the adequate yearly progress target for two or more years in ELA and Math  We received the High Performance Gap Closing School Award for school year 2005-2006  The New York State Business Council has recognized our reading improvement with the esteemed Pathfinder Award of 2002 In 2017, we were name an All Star Move to Improve School  Challenges we face : With the trends toward an increase in our ELL population, we will continue to emphasize strategies for the classroom teacher in all curriculum areas to address the needs of these children. We have established an ELL program for children in homes where English is a second language to promote literacy in the English language. Students are engaged in many group activities and a strong literacy and language program which is directly related to all curriculum areas. Many of our students are in need of Committee on Special Education and guidance counselor services. We have a team in our school 2 days per week. The Special Ed Liaison will prepare for and attend IEP meetings of children initially referred to special education. Our Guidance Counselor is here 5 days per week and, in collaboration with the CSE, has instituted many support groups for children in need of attention in these challenge areas. Based on our 2018 English Languagre Arts (E.L.A.)test scores 53% of students met state standards. 27% of Students with Disabilities were proficient and 14% of our English Language Learners (E.L.L) scored a 3 or 4. Based on our N.Y.S Math assessment 51% of our students met state standards. 38% of Students with Disabilities were proficient and 23% of English Language Learners scored a 3 or 4. Our school has been identified as a Good Standing School for the 2017-18 school year based on N.Y.S. designation. Based on School Data for 2017 and 2018:  Our school performed better than 60.3% of elementary schools in New York. In third grade, 38% of our students met state standards on the N.Y.S. Math test and 50% met state standards on the N.Y.S. E.L.A. Test. In fourth grade, 70% of our students met state standards on the N.Y.S. Math test and 69% met state standards on the N.Y.S. E.L.A. Test. In fifth grade, 45% of our students met state standards on the N.Y.S. Math test and 41% met state standards on the N.Y.S. E.L.A. Test.  Using Fountas and Pinnell data 2017-2018, a total of 56.2% of our ELL students increased three or more levels during the school year. Based on this data, there is a need to continue implementing effective instruction in order for our ELL students to maintain this growth each year. We presently have three ENL teachers who push-in and /or pull-out.  Using Fountas and Pinnell data 2017-2018, a total of 50.4% of all our students increased three or more levels during the school year. Focus: Our focus for this year is to continue working with our English Language Learner population until proficiency is met. A main instructional focus this year will be to increase the quality of student writing as well as the collaboration of teachers across grade levels to analyze and improve student writing. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2  26% of our population are students with special needs. The classification of our students include hearing impairment, Visual Impairment, Speech/Language Impairment, Learning Disability, and autism. Many of our students are in need of Committee on Special Education and guidance counselor services. We have a team in our school 2 days per week. The Special Ed Liaison will prepare for and attend IEP meetings of children initially referred to special education. Our Guidance Counselor is here 5 days per week and, in collaboration with the CSE, has instituted many support groups for children in need of attention in these challenging areas. 35% of our population is English Language Learners. They range from entering to expanding and Commanding. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on our Elementary School Quality Snapshot 2017, all students, including the lowest performing students, English Language Learners (ELLS) and students with disabilities, score an "excellent" on the state ELA and "excellent" on the Math exams. Based on our 2018 E.L.A. test scores 53% of students met state standards. 27% of Students with Disabilities were proficient and 14% of our English Language Learners scored a 3 or 4. Based on our N.Y.S Math assessment 51% of our students met state standards. 38% of Students with Disabilities were proficient and 23% of English Language Learners scored a 3 or 4. Our focus for this year is to continue working with our English Language Learner population until proficiency is met. Another main instructional focus this year will be to increase the quality of student writing as well as the collaboration of teachers across grade levels to analyze and improve student writing. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q066 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 494 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 91 81 18 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 77.7% % Reduced Lunch 27.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 5.7% 64.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 10.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.66 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 53.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 89% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 85 85 18 93.0% 9.3% 26.3% 5.3% 14.0% 6.1% 4 0% 8.9 51.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The following reflects the feedback from our most recent PPO visits which took place in November of 2017 and March of 2018. Based on the 2017-2018 PPO visits our school was well developed and/or proficient in the QR components of 1.1,1.2,1.3,1.4,2.2,3.1,3.4,4.1,4.2, and 5.1:  The school offers coherent, standards based curricula aligned to the instructional shifts with multiple resources that support learning. (1.1)  Across the vast majority of classrooms, teaching practices are aligned to the curricula and reflect a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching and the instructional shifts, as well as by discussions at the team and school levels (1.2)  The use of resources (e.g., budget, space, technology, coaches, partnerships) and other organizational decisions are aligned to and support the school’s instructional goals, as evident in meaningful student work products (1.3)  The school’s approach to culture-building, discipline, and social-emotional support is informed by a theory of action and results in a safe environment and inclusive culture that support progress toward the school’s goals; the school meaningfully involves student voice in decision-making to initiate, guide, and lead school improvement efforts (1.4)  The principal and teachers work together to create a coherent assessment schedule that provides a range of data, including daily exit slips and checks for understanding. Teacher teams effectively analyze data to gather information about students. (2.2)  The school establishes a coherent vision of school improvement that is reflected in a short list of focused, data-based goals that are tracked for progress and are understood and supported by the entire school community (3.1)  The principal has clearly defined standards for professional learning that include plans that incorporate staff input and classroom practices. The professional learning embeds the elements of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. (3.4)  The principal, through thoughtful observation, feedback and professional learning systems aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching and specific needs of teachers, support professional growth throughout the school. (4.1)  The principal ensures that teachers meet weekly for inquiry and curriculum planning. The principal offered  examples of teacher leadership that illustrates her commitment to shared decision making. (4.2) School leaders and faculty have an effective and transparent process in place to purposefully evaluate and adjust curricular and instructional practices in response to student learning needs and the expectations of the CCLS, with a focus on building alignment and coherence between what is taught and how it is taught (5.1) 5  We will continue to engage in rigorous and coherent curricula in all subjects by: Implementing standards based curricula that support learning   Working collaboratively to create coherent assessment schedules  Differentiating instruction to meet the needs of all students   Maintaining professional growth throughout the schools that enables staff input into classroom practices Incorporating the ELA/Math shifts into units of study An area of focus on our PPO (although we were rated proficient), is to check for understanding and include more formative assessment throughout all grade levels. The practice of formative assessment for unit development and adjustment as well as day-to-day lesson planning and adjustment impacts the entire instructional core. Based on the Principal's PPOs areas of focus are as follows:  Continue to think about how students can have more opportunity to lead discussions and move away from a teacher centered lesson. Work needs to be done on student speaking, which in turn will help students better share their thinking (1.2)  Continue to work with teachers to ensure that they continue their work around planning and preparation of lessons and units of study that they are emphasizing rigorous habits and higher order thinking across all classrooms and subjects (1.2)  Continue to provide challenging learning tasks in order to promote critical thinking and rigorous problem solving. (1.2)  Ensure that feedback on the craft of writing itself is a continued focus with writing rubrics (1.2) We will continue to encourage:  Teaching strategies that include questioning  Strategically provide multiple entry points and high-quality tasks and extensions into the curricula so that all learners are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks and demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student work products  We will move away from workbook dependent tasks and move towards student generated problem solving. (1.2)  High levels of student thinking, participation, and ownership of work products A data-driven approach is used to improve student performance using multiple measures to identify and address student weaknesses and target areas for growth on a continuous basis. Due to the fact that many of our students are new to our country, many of our ELLs are rebus level readers. We want to advance them to grade level and proficiency using Fountas and Pinnell and Benchmarks. We also want to prepare them for NYS assessments.  Using Fountas and Pinnell data 2017-2018, a total of 56.2% of our ELL students increased three or more levels during the school year. Based on this data, there is a need to continue implementing effective instruction in order for our ELL students to maintain this growth each year. We presently have three ENL teachers who push-in and /or pull-out.  Using Fountas and Pinnell data 2017-2018, a total of 50.4% of all our students increased three or more levels during the school year. Based on this data, there is a need to continue to establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide support to achieve higher expectations. We presently have three certified teachers, who either push-in or pull-out. Part 2 – Annual Goal 6  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of improved literacy instruction, there will be a 5% increase from 50% to 55% in the percentage of continuously enrolled English Language Learners progressing 3 reading levels as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments. 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers. All ELL K-5 students 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, all pedagogical staff. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs, Professional development, to impact change:  Teachers will focus on Excellence for ELLs strengthening the specialized skill sets necessary to effectively address the academic and linguistic needs of the diverse ELL population, creating and bolstering programs to support student growth.  Teachers will engage students in higher order questioning techniques through the use of the Depth of Knowledge (DOK) matrix.   Teachers will meet in grade-level and cross functional teams to review student data gathered from periodic assessments. Staff determined that a 1-2 level increase on Fountas and Pinnell in student performance would be the interim benchmark used by teacher teams to measure the effectiveness of the strategy; and whether additional support in using multiple data points to analyze data and differentiated instruction is needed.  Utilization of a balanced literacy model , research based reading and writing system (Wonders for ELLs ) with a focus on independent reading and GO Math system that are aligned to the CCLS to assist ELL learners develop their essential language skills.  Vocabulary Links will be utilized to aid the strengthening  of vocabulary skills and word recognition. Sadlier Phonics will be utilized as a differentiated tool to strengthen students phonemic awareness  Wonders ELD Companion Worktexts will be utilized as a differentiated tool to aid and strengthen comprehension skills and strategies.  Continental Press NY ELLs workbooks will provide standard based lessons for small group instruction. Students will practice various questions aligned to the NYSESLAT.  Rosetta Stone (Levels 1-5) for independent student assignments focusing on text and sounds to improve language acquisition. 8   Technology support for Internet based programs that target analysis of student needs and strategic improvement is used. ENL Online Language Sites: abcya.com, raz-kids.com, reading A-Z.com, brainpop ENL.com, starfall.com, imagine learning.com, destination reading.com, iReady Reading and Math, News-O-Matic, Benchmark Universe  Wilson Fundations Program for phonics in grades K, 1  and 2 is used to introduce letter sounds. Finish Line New York ELLS Bilingual Common Core workbooks will provide standard based lessons for small group instruction. Students will practice various questions aligned to the NYSESLAT.  ELL students in all grades will engage in the appropriate and engaging instructional math activities for their grade.  Professional development — Danielson 3b-questioning and discussion techniques for ELL students.  Our teachers receive training from the ELL teachers on a monthly basis in the use of ELL strategies in all curriculum areas. To understand needs and incorporate trust, we will continually seek input and feedback from families, students and teachers through: All teachers. All ELL K-5 students 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, all pedagogical staff.  Tuesday parent outreach sessions   Positive Parenting Workshops with topics that aid Student feedback through consultation. parents of students with IEPs, ELLS, and general education. Topics include: Positive Discipline rules and routines, Limitations and Boundaries, Diagnosis alphabet soup, Attention and Focus, Learning Strategies, Autism, and Interpersonal Relationships/bullying. Parents give input in the form of evaluation forms as well as interactive discussions. Additionally parents will be invited to participate in panel discussions to aid other parents. The purpose is to develop positive relationships with parents and staff to impact student achievement as well as the social/academic growth needed to become college and career ready.  Monthly grade meetings with parents and classroom teachers  Class and school-wide newsletters to communicate class events  The PS 66 Website  Parent coordinator's monthly meetings  Monthly PTA meetings SLT monthly meetings  Live Streaming of Schools Meeting and Conferences to  accommodate parents’ schedules 9 All teachers. All ELL K-5 students 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, all pedagogical staff. Strategies to address needs of ELLs:  The use of at-risk teachers will lower the teacher-pupil ratio, and will be used to develop pupil literacy/math skills in small groups. The Fountas and Pinnell Reading Program will provide these groups with the tools to increase student reading levels. Fountas and Pinnell will be used to assess ELL students.Teachers will reflect upon student growth and adjust instruction.   ENL teachers will use push-in/pull-out model  Students are engaged in many group activities and a strong literacy and language program which are directly related to all curriculum areas.  Before and after school programs to develop language skills that assist ELLs to function effectively in their regular classrooms.  All ELLs will participate in literacy-based programs that have been established as part of the overall instructional program.  All ELLs will be encouraged to attend before and after school programs and extended day.  ELL teachers will service all ELLs as required under NYC DOE regulations and guidelines.  The school has two Pre-K classes that focus on improving the oral language abilities, emergent literacy skills that ELLs will need in order to ensure a successful transition to the primary elementary school grades.  Direct instruction and high quality professional development to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At least three Parent workshops will be held by administration, teachers, and staff throughout the year to help parents understand rigorous instruction and The Common Core in order to support their children at home. Teachers will also be encouraged to meet individually with parents to reflect and discuss on practices that can be used at home to meet the individual needs of their child. We will also offer live streaming of meetings to accommodate parent's schedules. Strategies to increase parent involvement include:  Parent coordinator conducts monthly parent workshops.  Related services point person conducts monthly meetings with parents  Parent outreach on Tuesdays from 2:40-3:20  PTA meetings  Title I Parent meetings 0   The PS 66 website to foster communication between the teacher and the home  Monthly grade meetings with parents on a rotating basis  To communicate whenever feasible with non-English speaking parents in their home language in order to support shared parent-school accountability, parent access to information about their children’s educational options, and parents’ capacity to improve their children’s achievement. Live Streaming of Schools Meeting and Conferences to accommodate parents’ schedules   Utilizing the NYCDOE translation and interpretation services Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources :  Administrators, Teachers, Parents, Parent coordinator, SETSS teachers, ELL teachers, Guidance counselor, related services providers  Reading Wonders, Go Math, Fundations, Passport to Social Studies, Science Fusion, Measuring Up Science   Technological support and Internet based programs. Fountas and Pinnell Assessments, Benchmark assessments, unit assessments, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, 50% of English Language Learners continuously enrolled at PS 66 Q from October 1, 2018 will have an increase of at least 1 reading level as evidenced by Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas & Pinnell assessment data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the Chancellor’s initiative for family engagement our school implemented Student-Led Conferences to promote parent involvement and increase student achievement. During the 2017-2018 school year, each teacher was required to schedule a meeting with at least four parents a month to discuss the progress of their child. After analyzing the data, we noticed a pattern of parents canceling the meetings, which resulted in Student-Led Conferences occurring on average twice a month. During the 2017-2018 year however, parent involvement did improve as evidenced by sign in sheets, and conference logs. We will continue to address this need by:  Inviting parents to interactive, hands-on workshops that allow both parents and students to take part in the learning experience and allows students to explain the academic purpose of the activity to their parent  Conducting parent-teacher, student-led conferences in grades 3-5, bi-annually, during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed and future goals will be set by the student  Providing translation services for parents based on home language survey results  Hosting annual celebrations such as Multicultural Day which allows both students and parents to share their cultures with the school community  Reaching out to parents who are unable to attend the conferences at school through Class Dojo, Skype, email, and/or phone conferences  Providing incentives to students and parents who attend Student-Led Conferences  Establish a variety of self assessment tools for students to use to aid in self reflection  Continue to develop protocols for student led conferences  Create systems/structures for students to reflect and access their work Based on School Data for 2017-2018:  Teachers, parents and students participated in Student Led Conferences on average of three times a month.  Based on this data, there is a need to continue to increase parent involvement as it is critical to increasing student achievement and cultivating relationships with the families.  Our school initiative is to use Student Led Conferences as a way to continue to establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve higher expectations. Teachers will continue to collaborate in order to develop a successful and beneficial plan for students and parents to engage in Student Led Conferences’ on a weekly basis. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers in Grades K-5 will implement and use the Student Led Conferences Model of PS 66 in order to increase the number of student led conferences by 5% from 20% to 25% as measured by teacher's parent conference logs. 3 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students K-5, ELLs, SWD 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, all pedagogical staff. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs, Professional development, to impact change  Teachers will meet during vertical and horizontal team meetings in order to discuss and plan the best way to attract parents and students to Student-Led Conferences.  Teachers will meet in professional settings to discuss the   successes and failures of Student Led Conferences in order to learn from one another. Increased teacher leadership and ownership of their learning as evidenced by teacher led sessions based on planning and implementing Student Led Conferences Increased Parent/Community Workshops conducted by Classroom teachers – curriculum (literacy, math, test sophistication), classroom procedures, grading policies, etc · Technology teacher - internet safety, Class Dojo  Guidance Counselor – behavior strategies, middle school application process and recommendation letters for specialized middle schools , kindergarten orientation Literacy Team– ELA/Math State exam, curriculum   Parent Coordinator – helping your child succeed at school, attendance issues  Principal – school wide expectations  Use of Danielson’s Frameworks — focus will be on Frameworks 4D, Participating in the Professional Community  Teachers are encourage to use the 7U period to conduct student led conferences via Skype Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups are: All students K-5, ELLs, SWD 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, all pedagogical staff. In order to ensure that all students and parents are participating in Student Led Conferences’ different teacher teams will invite 4 parents and students to take part in Student Led Conferences’ to address the following concerns:  Special Education Department – IEP goals and classroom modifications, support services. This team will focus on the UDL strategies of multiple means of representation, action and expression, and engagement. This enables teachers to present information in different ways, stimulating interest and motivating students for learning—not only for our ELLs, SWDs, and SIFE and STH  ESL Teachers – acquisition and strategies that are being use in school and can be used at home. Speech teacher – speech and language development  To understand needs and incorporate trust, students will build on eachother’s ideas during class discussions: To understand needs and incorporate trust, teachers will participate in high quality, focused professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement upon Student Led Conferences’. This will be evident based on Student Led Conference Logs, team meetings, and Parent Surveys. All students K-5, ELLs, SWD 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, all pedagogical staff. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. At least 3 Parent workshops will be conducted by administration, teachers, and staff throughout the year to engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment and strategies in order to support their children at home. Teachers will also be encouraged to meet individually with parents to reflect and discuss on practices that can be used at home to meet the individual needs of their child. We will also offer live streaming of meetings to accommodate parent's schedules. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement:  Parent coordinator conducts monthly parent workshops.  Related services point person conducts monthly meetings with parents  Parent outreach on Tuesdays from 2:40-3:20  PTA meetings  Title I Parent meeting  The PS 66 website to foster communication between the teacher and the home  Monthly grade meetings with parents on a rotating basis  Communicate whenever feasible with non-English speaking parents in their home language in order to support shared parent-school accountability, parent access to information about their children’s educational options, and parents’ capacity to improve their children’s achievement. Inviting parents to interactive, hands-on workshops that allow both parents and students to take part in the learning experience and allows students to explain the academic purpose of the activity to their parent  5  Conducting student-led conferences in grades K-5, at least once a year, during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed and future goals will be set by the student.  Continuing to uphold an open door policy with parents from all backgrounds and nationalities by supplying translation services for all of the languages seen in our school.  Hosting annual celebrations such as Multicultural Day which allows both students and parents to share their cultures with the school community  Reaching out to parents who cannot attend the conferences via Class Dojo, email, and/or phone conferences  Providing initiatives to students and parents who attend Student-Led Conferences with their parents   Coffee with the Principal once a month Student of the Month during PTA meetings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Administrators, Teachers, Parents, Parent coordinator, ELL teachers, Guidance counselor  Twitter  Official School Website  Other streaming mediums  Apple Facetime  Parent Notification Flyers  PTA Meetings   Parent Engagement on Tuesdays Student Led Conference Logs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers in Grades K-5 will implement and use the Student Led Conferences Model of PS 66 in order to increase the number of student led conferences by 5% from 15% to 20% as measured by teacher's parent conference logs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Led Conference Logs and other appropriate sign in documents or sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A data-driven approach is used to improve student performance using multiple measures to identify and address student weaknesses and target areas for growth on a continuous basis. After reviewing and analyzing NYS assessment results, NYC and school benchmark tests, teacher-made/grade level tests, student portfolios, classroom performance: Based on our 2018 E.L.A. test scores 53% of students met state standards. 27% of Students with Disabilities were proficient and 14% of our English Language Learners scored a 3 or 4. Based on our N.Y.S Math assessment 51% of our students met state standards. 38% of Students with Disabilities were proficient and 23% of English Language Learners scored a 3 or 4. An area of focus on our PPO (although we were rated proficient), is to check for understanding and include more formative assessment throughout all grade levels. The practice of formative assessment for unit development and adjustment as well as day-to-day lesson planning and adjustment impacts the entire instructional core. Based on the Principal's PPOs areas of focus are as follows:  Continue to think about how students can have more opportunity to lead discussions and move away from a teacher centered lesson. Work needs to be done on student speaking, which in turn will help students better share their thinking (1.2)  Continue to work with teachers to ensure that they continue their work around planning and preparation of lessons and units of study that they are emphasizing rigorous habits and higher order thinking across all classrooms and subjects (1.2)  Continue to provide challenging learning tasks in order to promote critical thinking and rigorous problem solving. (1.2)  Ensure that feedback on the craft of writing itself is a continued focus with writing rubrics (1.2) We will continue to encourage:  Teaching strategies that include questioning  Strategically provide multiple entry points and high-quality tasks and extensions into the curricula so that all learners are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks and demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student work products  We will move away from workbook dependent tasks and move towards student generated problem solving. (1.2)  High levels of student thinking, participation, and ownership of work products A data-driven approach is used to improve student performance using multiple measures to identify and address student weaknesses and target areas for growth on a continuous basis. Due to the fact that many of our students are 7  new to our country, many of our ELLs are rebus level readers. We want to advance them to grade level and proficiency using Fountas and Pinnell and Benchmarks. We also want to prepare them for NYS assessments. Based on this data, there is a need for an improvement in the area of writing in order to increase student achievement on in-house writing assessments, writing tasks, and NYS ELA tests as well as benchmarks. We will continue to address these needs by: • Implementing our school’s instructional focus this year to improve the quality of student writing. • All teachers seek to rigorously guide students through the process of creating narratives, informational texts, and opinion-based essays that meet or exceed grade level standards. • Teachers will prompt students to create on-demand pieces at the beginning of the year in order to immediately determine the strengths and weaknesses of every writer. • This year we will continue to focus on the writing process and intermittently monitor student progress throughout the process • This data will drive instruction and be used to gauge progress. • We incorporate the Teachers College Writers Workshop Philosophy as a supplement to our Wonders program in order for the students to have the learning tools and strategies necessary to be budding authors. • Within each writing unit, children are asked to self-reflect, peer edit, and utilize rubrics that contain clear expectations for each written task. These steps support their creation of original, well-constructed pieces of writing. • Teachers will working horizontally and vertically across grades to analyze student work and observe and record trends among writing to improve future instruction • Teachers will attend additional professional developments in the area of writing to increase student achievement and turnkey important strategies to all staff members Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, as a result of teachers collaborating horizontally and vertically to align writing curriculum there will be a 10% increase from 50% to 60% of continuously enrolled students who increase at least 2 levels from their initial assessments in all content areas as measured by selected writing rubrics which range from levels 1 through 4. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Programs: All teachers and support staff 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, all pedagogical staff. 9/2018-6/2019 All teachers. All students, K-5 including ELLS and SWD. Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, all pedagogical staff.  Teachers in K-5 will collaborate on the grade to design CCLS aligned writing lessons based on Lucy Calkin’s Writing Pathways and Wonders Writing  Teachers will collaborate across grades on the school’s Vertical Team in order to align writing curriculum and writing rubrics. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups:  AIS small group instruction, before & after school programs for Level 1 and 2 students,SETSS, and ENL program conducted by certified SETSS and ELL teachers. Differentiation will be given in small groups which will be developed through a collaboration of teachers.  A Special Education IEP liaison will be assigned to support the Special Education student and staff needs including: professional development, IEP mandates adaptive strategies, best approach methodology, data analysis, comprehensive needs assessment, and program design. Students placed in an ENL Program will receive instruction in English only using intensive ENL methodology   Teachers will assist students (including SWDs and ENLs) in identifying and establishing clear learning goals to improve their reading comprehension of both fiction and non-fiction text. Support staff (SETSS teachers and ENL teachers) will provide services in order to support the needs of SWDs and ENLs.   Meet monthly with Inquiry Teams to ensure that students with IEP’s and/or special needs are receiving the services needed to succeed and show growth. 9  Teachers will model close reading, analyzing informational texts, and higher order questioning and discussion techniques. Students will demonstrate skill mastery using higher order thinking and comprehension through informational writing. Activities that address the Capacity Framework element of Trust:  To understand needs and incorporate trust, teachers will participate in high quality, focused professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement as evidenced in Effective/Highly Effective observations, non-rateable visits, LASW (Looking at Student Work) protocol, revisions to lesson and unit plans.  Coaches, Teachers, ENL, and special education liaisons will provide professional development for teachers and paraprofessionals in order to share strategies and best practices that can be used to improve student comprehension. All teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, all pedagogical staff. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At least three Parent workshops will be held by administration, teachers, and staff throughout the year to help parents understand collaborative teachers and strategies in order to support their children at home. Teachers will also be encouraged to meet individually with parents to reflect and discuss on practices that can be used at home to meet the individual needs of their child. We will also offer live streaming of meetings to accommodate parent's schedules. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement:  Parent coordinator conducts monthly parent workshops.  Related services point personnel conducts monthly meetings with parents  Parent outreach on Tuesdays from 2:40-3:20  PTA meetings  Title I Parent meeting  The PS 66 website to foster communication between the teacher and the home  Monthly grade meetings with parents on a rotating basis  To communicate whenever feasible with non-English speaking parents in their home language in order to support shared parent-school accountability, parent access to information about their children’s educational options, and parents’ capacity to improve their children’s achievement.  Teachers will reach out to parents of ESL, SWD and struggling students to inform them of their child’s progress and work together to promote academic success. Live streaming to conference with parents  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 0  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Administrators, Teachers, Parents, Parent coordinator, ELL teachers, Guidance counselor  Reading Wonders, Go Math, Fundations, Wonders Close Reading Companion, Wonders Writing, Passport to Social Studies, and Science Fountas and Pinnell Assessments, Benchmark assessments, unit assessments, etc.   Technological support and Internet based programs  Professional Development sessions on writing Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February of 2019, as a result of teachers collaborating horizontally and vertically to align writing curriculum there will be a 10% increase from 25% to 35% of continuously enrolled students who increase at least 2 levels from their initial assessments in all content areas as measured by selected writing rubrics which range from levels 1 through 4. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Teacher surveys  Writing conference logs   Writing task data In-house writing assessment scores Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The following reflects the feedback from our most recent PPO visits which took place in November of 2017 and March of 2018. Based on the 2017-2018 PPO visits our school was well developed and/or proficient in the QR components of 1.1,1.2,1.3,1.4,2.2,3.1,3.4,4.1,4.2, and 5.1:  The school offers coherent, standards based curricula aligned to the instructional shifts with multiple resources that support learning. (1.1)  Across the vast majority of classrooms, teaching practices are aligned to the curricula and reflect a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching and the instructional shifts, as well as by discussions at the team and school levels (1.2)  The use of resources (e.g., budget, space, technology, coaches, partnerships) and other organizational decisions are aligned to and support the school’s instructional goals, as evident in meaningful student work products (1.3)  The school’s approach to culture-building, discipline, and social-emotional support is informed by a theory of action and results in a safe environment and inclusive culture that support progress toward the school’s goals; the school meaningfully involves student voice in decision-making to initiate, guide, and lead school improvement efforts (1.4)  The principal and teachers work together to create a coherent assessment schedule that provides a range of data, including daily exit slips and checks for understanding. Teacher teams effectively analyze data to gather information about students. (2.2)  The school establishes a coherent vision of school improvement that is reflected in a short list of focused, data-based goals that are tracked for progress and are understood and supported by the entire school community (3.1)  The principal has clearly defined standards for professional learning that include plans that incorporate staff input and classroom practices. The professional learning embeds the elements of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. (3.4)  The principal, through thoughtful observation, feedback and professional learning systems aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching and specific needs of teachers, support professional growth throughout the school. (4.1)  The principal ensures that teachers meet weekly for inquiry and curriculum planning. The principal offered examples of teacher leadership that illustrates her commitment to shared decision making. (4.2) School leaders and faculty have an effective and transparent process in place to purposefully evaluate and adjust curricular and instructional practices in response to student learning needs and the expectations of the CCLS, with a focus on building alignment and coherence between what is taught and how it is taught (5.1) We will continue to engage in rigorous and coherent curricula in all subjects by: Implementing standards based curricula that support learning   2   Working collaboratively to create coherent assessment schedules  Differentiating instruction to meet the needs of all students   Maintaining professional growth throughout the schools that enables staff input into classroom practices Incorporating the ELA/Math shifts into units of study An area of focus on our PPO (although we were rated proficient), is to check for understanding and include more formative assessment throughout all grade levels. The practice of formative assessment for unit development and adjustment as well as day-to-day lesson planning and adjustment impacts the entire instructional core. Based on the Principal's PPOs areas of focus are as follows:  Continue to think about how students can have more opportunity to lead discussions and move away from a teacher centered lesson. Work needs to be done on student speaking, which in turn will help students better share their thinking (1.2)  Continue to work with teachers to ensure that they continue their work around planning and preparation of lessons and units of study that they are emphasizing rigorous habits and higher order thinking across all classrooms and subjects (1.2)  Continue to provide challenging learning tasks in order to promote critical thinking and rigorous problem solving. (1.2)  Ensure that feedback on the craft of writing itself is a continued focus with writing rubrics (1.2) We will continue to encourage:  Teaching strategies that include questioning  Strategically provide multiple entry points and high-quality tasks and extensions into the curricula so that all learners are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks and demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student work products  We will move away from workbook dependent tasks and move towards student generated problem solving. (1.2) Also from our most recent , we were well developed in the area of engaging in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning.  The principal will continue to lead PD and have beginning of year, middle of year and end of year goal setting meetings with teachers to ensure they are meeting their professional goals as well as the goals of their students. School leaders will articulate expectations in post-observation conferences and in written observations. School leaders and faculty regularly ensure the achievement of learning goals by tracking progress at the school, teacher team, and classroom level .    High quality professional development in Literacy and data retrieval is provided for teachers and parents. The school aligns professional development with student performance data, the needs of the staff, and regional initiatives.  We have established teams on every grade level where staff members, after analyzing student work, provide instruction to students in small groups.  Teams help to develop teacher capacity and collaboration. They empower the teachers to make decisions about how best to instruct their students. It enables them to organize around the learning of a select group of students for whom they then share responsibility. It focuses teachers on aligning assessment, curriculum, instruction and professional development to generate school-wide improvement. Based on Advance domain 3c data, 29.4% of our teachers scored effective and 70.6% scored highly effective. Our goal is to increase the number of teachers scoring highly effective in this area of engaging students in learning. 3  A data-driven approach is used to improve student performance using multiple measures to identify and address student weaknesses and target areas for growth on a continuous basis. Based on our 2018 E.L.A. test scores 53% of students met state standards. 27% of Students with Disabilities were proficient and 14% of our English Language Learners scored a 3 or 4. Based on our N.Y.S Math assessment 51% of our students met state standards. 38% of Students with Disabilities were proficient and 23% of English Language Learners scored a 3 or 4. In previous PPO's it was stated, “Led by the principal, teachers engage in structured professional collaborations that promote shared leadership and focuses on student learning." Our school has been identified as a Good Standing School for the 2017-18 school year based on NYS designation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of school leadership leaders implementing 20 Vertical Team Meetings to acquire strategies to improve using assessment in instruction practices there will be a 10% increase from 30% to 40% of teachers that receive an effective or highly effective rating in component 3D of the Danielson Framework as measured by the 2019 end of year summative ratings in Advance. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, all pedagogical staff Research-based instructional programs , professional development: All teachers 9/2018-6/2019  Principal will empower teachers to make the decisions about how to best instruct their students to achieve optimum outcomes.  Organize teachers around the learning of a select group  of students for whom they share responsibility and compile diagnostic and formative assessments. Focus teachers on aligning assessment, curriculum, instruction, and professional development to generate school-wide improvement.We are providing additional at-risk teachers who will lower the teacher-pupil ratio, and will be used to develop pupil literacy/math skills in small groups to create dynamic situations for increasing rigor.  Additional at-risk teachers are being provided who will lower the teacher-pupil ratio, and will be used to develop pupil literacy/math skills in small groups to create dynamic situations for increasing rigor.  Monthly professional development focused on Danielson Components 3c and 3d Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups: 9/2018-6/2019 All students including ELLs and SWDs Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, all pedagogical staff  AIS small group instruction, before & after school programs for Level 1 and 2 students, SETSS, and an ENL program conducted by certified SETSS and ELL teachers  A Special Education liaison will be assigned to support the Special Education student and staff needs including: professional development, IEP mandates, adaptive strategies, best approach methodology, data analysis, comprehensive needs assessment, and program design. Students placed in an ENL Program will receive instruction in English only using intensive ENL  5 methodology. We will continuously assess students progress. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement:  Parent coordinator conducts monthly parent workshops.  Related services point person conducts monthly meetings with parents  Parent outreach on Tuesdays from 2:40-3:20  PTA meetings  Title I Parent meetings  PS 66Q website to foster communication between the teacher and the home  Monthly grade meetings with parents on a rotating basis  To communicate whenever feasible with non-English speaking parents in their home language in order to support shared parent-school accountability, parent access to information about their children’s educational options, and parents’ capacity to improve their children’s achievement.  Offer live streaming of meetings to accommodate parents' schedules Activities that address the Capacity Framework element of Trust  To understand needs and incorporate trust, the Principal will ensure professional learning is evident and has an impact on student achievement and classroom instruction.  Principal supports the sharing of promising practices  Deepens collaboration and communication between school and home. All teachers. All parents of students, K-5 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, all pedagogical staff, Parent Coordinator All teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, all pedagogical staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent workshops will be held by administration, teachers, and staff to help parents understand Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home. Teachers will also be encouraged to meet individually with parents to reflect and discuss practices that can be used at home to meet the individual needs of their child. We will also offer live streaming of meetings to accommodate parent's schedules. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 6   Administrators, Teachers, Parents, Parent coordinator, ELL teachers, Guidance counselor  Reading Wonders, Go Math, Fundations, Houghton Mifflin Passport to Social Studies, and Science   Technological support and Internet based programs Fountas and Pinnell Assessments, Benchmark assessments, unit assessments, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leadership will review Advance Data, instructional rounds feedback, and intervisitations. As a result of school leadership implementing 10 Vertical Team Meetings to acquire strategies to improve using assessment in instruction practices there will be a 5% increase from 15% to 20% of teachers that receive an effective or highly effective rating in component 3D of the Danielson Framework as measured by Advance Ratings from September. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  On-going progress will be monitored by administrators through observations, Advance Reports, looking at student work, Vertical Team Meeting and/or horizontal agendas and lesson plans. Formal and Informal observations will show an increase in high levels well planned utilization of assessment in instruction. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our PPO, we were found to be well developed in the area of school culture. We establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations. Based on our 2017-2018 school survey:  85% of our parents completed the survey  Our school scored above average when comparing results of other schools both district-wide and citywide in all areas besides Strong Family and Community Ties In the component for Rigorous Instruction we scored 4.26 In the component for Collaborative Teachers we scored 4.56 In the component for Effective School Leadership we scored 4.23 In the component for Trust we scored 4.22 In the component for Strong Family and Community Ties we scored 3.95      Based on this data, and focusing on our average response rate in the area of Strong Family and Community Ties there is a continued need to maintain and increase a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes with parents and families that supports the academic and personal growth of students that is understood and supported by the entire school community. We will continue to implement practices to encourage parental participation and involvement in students’ education. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of requesting parent volunteers for various classroom activities, there will be a 4% increase from 70% to 74% in the percentage of families that say they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school, as measured by the results of the 2019 NYC School Survey. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: Teachers and Parents of all students K-5 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, all pedagogical staff  Students will be empowered with the academic skills, rich civic and social experiences to further their educational goals by providing opportunities for students and parent participation.  All parents and teachers will be invited to attend regularly scheduled parent and school meetings PTA, SLT, Annual Title I Parent Meeting, Title I Parent committee, PTA) to inform and strengthen the parent and school community connection.  All parents will attend parent/teacher conferences 4 times a year  The PS 66 website will foster communication  Maintaining outreach logs, feedback from monthly parent meetings, the PS 66 website and teacher and parent responses on the School Survey.  Reach out to parents via our social media site on Twitter  Offer streaming of meetings via technology  School trips to museums and other cultural institutions are planned throughout the year.  Community events aid our success in all areas. Our International Day provides parents, staff, and students with an opportunity to share information about heritage, customs and food in a collegial manner.  During our Career Day, parents discuss with students their various careers including education needed, training, etc. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups: Teachers and Parents of all students K-5 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, all pedagogical staff  AIS small group instruction for Level 1 and 2 students, SETSS, and ENL program conducted by certified SETSS and ELL teachers 9   A Special Education liaison teacher will be assigned to support the Special Education student and staff needs including: professional development, IEP mandates, adaptive strategies, best approach methodology, data analysis, comprehensive needs assessment, and program design and relay this information to parents Students placed in an ENL Program will receive instruction in English only using intensive ENL methodology. Use of strategies will be relayed to parents.   Parent Workshops and meetings will be offered to give extra time to discuss needs of ENL and SWD  ENL workshops and SWD parent workshops will be incorporated into our Parent Engagement Tuesday Meetings  ENL and SWD newsletter components will be added to our parent newsletters Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement:  Parent coordinator conducts monthly parent workshops.  Related services point person conducts monthly meetings with parents  Parent outreach on Tuesdays from 2:40-3:20  PTA meetings  Title I Parent meetings  The PS 66 website to foster communication between the teacher and the home  Monthly grade meetings with parents on a rotating basis  To communicate whenever feasible with non-English speaking parents in their home language in order to support shared parent-school accountability, parent access to information about their children’s educational options, and parents’ capacity to improve their children’s achievement.  Offer Live Streaming of Schools Meeting and Conferences to accommodate parents’ schedules  Teachers will be provided professional development training in online programs (ex, SKYPE, Dojo,Weebly) so they can increase communication with parents on a daily basis Staff will work in teams to present to parents on a variety of topics specific to their child’s needs to help them better understand how they can help their child succeed  Teachers and Parents of all students K-5 9/2017-6/2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, all pedagogical staff, Parent Coordinator Activities that address the Capacity Framework element of Trust:  To understand needs and incorporate trust, parents and teachers are encouraged to participate and attend in all scheduled parent and school meetings to increase and strengthen the school/parent connections. Teachers and Parents of all students K-5 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads, all pedagogical staff 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Friends of Forest Park St. John's University   One Stop Richmond Hill Block Association   Eric Ulrich New York City Council member  Richmond Hill Community Center  New York Assemblyman Mike Miller Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Administrators, Teachers, Parents, Parent coordinator, ELL teachers, Guidance counselor ● Reading Wonders, GoMath, Fundations,Passport to Social Studies, Science ● Fountas and Pinnell Assessments, Benchmark assessments, unit assessments, etc. ● Technological support and Internet based programs, Class Dojo, Parent Workshops, Twitter, PTA Meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will increase by 2% from 70% to 72% in the percentage of parents who believe that they have been asked to volunteer time to support their school as measured by the 2019 School Survey. School leadership will work with teachers to conduct monthly parent surveys to review mid-year progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2019 School Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students scoring Level 1 and/or 2 on the ELA; Fountas and Pinnell individual student assessment Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, and before or after school programs. Fundations, Small groups: Students designated as at-risk will participate in small group instruction that takes place in each class in order to realize our school goal of improving literacy. To reduce student ratio, a teacher push-in model in literacy is implemented. The teachers can spend more time targeting the individual needs of each child including children with special and language-learning needs. Phonics and Phonemic Awareness Grades K, 1, and 2; ELA/Reading strategies and skills; We Utilize: WondersReading System; In grades K-2, at-risk students are assessed in phonics and phonemic awareness using Wilson Fundations; Wonderworks intervention program; Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention System; Ready ELA; Rosetta Stone for ELLs, Destination Reading, Imagine Learning, etc. Emphasis will be placed on critical 2  thinking, reading and writing skills and strategies in order to promote and reinforce a school wide focus on literacy. Ready Math, Destination Math, IXL, BrainPop, Go Math Mathematics Students scoring Level 1 and/or 2 on the NYS Math Assessment, Go Math assessments. Science Students scoring Level 1 and/or 2 on theELA; Extra time will be devoted to content instruction Frequency based on identified needs Classroom Computers will be used for informational purposes by students. FountasandPinnell individual student assessment Students scoring Level 1 and/or 2 on theNYSMath Assessment,Go Mathassessments. Academic Intervention Support in the area of science will be provided to those students who scored a one or two During the school day, and before or after school programs. During school day Students designated as at-risk will participate in small group instruction that takes place in each class in order to realize our school goal of improving math skills. To reduce student ratio, a push-in model in math will be implemented. The teachers can spend more time targeting the individual needs of each child. Reduced Student-Teacher ratio enabling small group and individualized instruction based on assessed needs. One to one or small group. The ELL teacher will assist students in meeting the proficiency levels. The SETSS teacher will assist students with IEPs in meeting the proficiency levels. 3 Extra time will be devoted to content instruction Frequency based on identified needs Reduced Student-Teacher ratio enabling small group and individualized instruction based on assessed needs. During school day Classroom Computers will be used for informational purposes by students. The ELL teacher will assist students in meeting the proficiency levels. The SETSS teacher will assist students with IEPs in meeting the proficiency levels. Counseling programs. One to One During school day. Evaluation by psychologist. Small Group Social Studies in on the final 15-16 report card in Science and/or Mathematics. Students scoring Level 1 and/or 2 on theELA; FountasandPinnell individual student assessment Passport to Social Studies individual assessment Academic Intervention Support in the area of social studieswill be provided to those students who scored a one or two on the 15-16 final report card in and/or increased less than 2 levels in Fountas and Pinnell during the 15-16 school year. Guidance services are used to improve the conflict resolution skills of the students. The guidance counselor provides support for new teachers in this area as well as defining student referral policies. He/she will continue with our school wide behavior modification incentive program. The interventions, as At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 4  delineated in the New Continuum Plan will focus upon providing students with on-going support services. Guidance counseling is provided during school hours in a small group or individual setting depending upon the needs of the child. The purpose is to help the children develop knowledge and understanding of themselves and of others to better reach their full potential. Our school psychologist is at our school on a part time basis. She does not provide AIS services.Her sole responsibility consists of evaluations and re-evaluations. Our school's social worker is at our school on a part time basis. She does not provide AIS services. 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 35 students living in shelters or temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. PS 66 Q will provide opportunities for all children to meet the State's proficient and advanced levels of student academic achievement. To meet the educational needs of the STH population:   Staff will use effective methods and instructional strategies that are based on scientifically-based research Increase the amount and quality of learning time, such as extended school year, before/after-school and summer program opportunities.  Provide an enriched and accelerated curriculum.  Address the needs of all children in the school, but particularly the needs of low academic achieving children and those at risk of not meeting the State academic content standards and are members of the target population of any program that is included in the School wide Program. These programs may include counseling, pupil services, mentoring services, college and career awareness/preparation, and the integration of vocational and technical education programs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A We are a Title I school. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  N/A We are a Title I school. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A We are a Title I school. 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. At PS 66:  All recruited teachers will be appropriately certified and highly qualified MATH and ELL teachers.  The Principal will work closely with Human Resources in order to follow the policies set forth by the DOE to ensure that the selection of highly qualified teachers follows the guidelines set by the NYS Education Department.  Mentors are assigned to support struggling and un-qualified teachers.  The school’s professional development committee will target the assessed pedagogical needs of the staff with differentiated high quality professional development. Professional development will take place weekly on Mondays, and designated professional development days.  Professional development will be on-going at weekly grade conferences, and as needed to be provided by the lead teachers.  The Principal in collaboration with Human Resources will work to identify qualified teachers through major recruitment campaigns and through relationships with Colleges and Universities. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development (PD) is given in order to ensure teachers are implementing the latest strategies or methods to achieve success and meet all goals. PD is coordinated by the administration and a curriculum teams, who work together to combine ideas on effective planning for teachers, on different ways to assess learning, on developing curricula and instructional materials, and assisting teachers’ individual needs for professional development. The PD will take place on days as prescribed by the DOE guidelines and professional development days. PD will be on-going at grade conferences. Professional Development will include: 8   Alignment with school goals, state and district standards and assessments, and other professional learning activities including formative teacher evaluation Focus on core content and modeling of teaching strategies for the content Inclusion of opportunities for active learning of new teaching strategies    Provision of opportunities for collaboration among teachers  Inclusion of embedded follow-up and continuous feedback Professional Development Long Term Goals Improve student learning and achievement by promoting high quality classroom instruction   Use Danielson’s Component Rubrics to self-assess practices in each domain   Promote educational leadership among collaborative groups /teacher teams  Provide opportunities and resources that support professional development activities initiated by an Support teacher growth through the ADVANCE individual staff member or group of staff members  Reflect on and shift daily practices as well as the planning and implementation of Common Core aligned units  Use a shared understanding of Danielson to identify areas on which to focus and actively pursue professional growth Short Term Goals Individual Student Goals - Introduce goals and procedures to be adapted in the 2017 – 2018 school year   Utilizing data and student information will enable the teacher to develop Individual Student Goals  Fountas and Pinnell, norming and review. Teachers will review and interpret student data. Collected information will be placed into spreadsheets and STARS Classroom. Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques  Formative Assessment--Participants will utilize data to improve student achievement, understanding of content standards and analysis of student responses.  Close Reading of Complex Text - Participants will realize and develop strategies for student-use in comprehending complex text through the use of discussions.  Guided Reading - Teachers develop questions to scaffold specific comprehension thought processes students will need to synthesize reading.  DOK/ Bloom’s - Participants will create genuine discussion plans to promote thinking among students and initiate/extend classroom discussions using DOK and Bloom’s Taxonomy.  Mathematics - Teachers will participate in an expansion of enhanced quality of content presented to students. More frequent use of investigative practices, questioning, and sense-making practices. All teachers with ELL students and SWD in their classes are trained in appropriate instructional strategies so as to meet the needs of the children within the confines of their classrooms. In addition, the ELL teacher and Special Ed Liaison will provide additional support and staff development as needed. Staff development for reading in the content area to focus on a variety of teaching strategies will be provided as needed. The ENL teacher and Special Ed Liaison provides PD to classroom teachers. All teachers who have ELL students and SWD are provided with appropriate instructional strategies in order to meet the needs of the children within the confines of their classroom. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 9  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Student transition: Schedule a visit or a series of visits to the new school for the children   Provide pre-kindergarten children with a summer package that includes transition activities  Encourage children to ask questions about kindergarten  Include Pre-Kindergarten in all school-wide functions and initiatives Involvement of Parents in Transition:  Provide parents with information about the school their child will be attending  Invite school personnel, teachers and principals, to attend a parent meeting and discuss the kindergarten program, the role of parents in the school and to answer any other questions. Family assistants and parent coordinators should also be included to assist in the translation of the information during the meeting.  Establish routines that children will use during the year, ex. where children will be picked up at the end of the day, where children will eat lunch, etc. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At PS 66, we will include teachers in the decisions regarding the use of academic assessments in order to provide information on, and to improve the achievement of individual students and the overall instructional program. Teachers will meet periodically to be staff developed in understanding the meaning of test results and will use test data to drive instruction. Teachers will have many opportunities to discuss assessments particularly at the following:  Professional development day planning  Monday and Tuesday professional development  Grade Conferences 0   Teacher Team meetings  At inquiry periods 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 229,921 53,526 `17,102 3,760.00 3,149,881 X X X X X Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, and 5e Section 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, and 5e Section 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, and 5e Section 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, and 5e Section 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, and 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 1  combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 66 Queens, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 66 Queens, will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 3  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  Tactively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.;  Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions;   Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 4   Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; Supporting or hosting Family Day events;   Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Streaming PTA conferences via technology to increase parent involvement  School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS66 Queens, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:     conducting Parent-Teacher Conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  5   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes) set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 6  volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child   Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Title III funding provides supplemental services to grades K-5 in an extended day program. The primary focus is to provide supplemental instructional support to students' acquisition of English and the development of language skills that will enable them to function effectively in the monolingual classroom. The teachers will base instruction on the individual needs of the students to the greatest possible extent. Work samples are to be reviewed and groups are formed and changed periodically to allow for flexible groupings. The per session ELL teachers will use diagnostic tools and formative assessments practices to group students and to plan lessons. This data is helpful when preparing differentiated instruction effectively in grades K-5, with emphasis on grades 3, 4, and 5. In addition, the ELL students will practice strategies to assist them with the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math standardized assessments. The Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs will provide supplemental services to students in grades K-5. The program will adhere to the school's curriculum with focus on the four modalities in English acquisition: reading, writing, speaking, and listening. Reading and Math Instruction will take place during a PM ENL Program from 2:25 to 4:15, 2 days a week, Wednesdays and Thursdays for 24 weeks with a total of 48 sessions. The program will address the needs of at-risk students in these grades. The program will begin on October 3, 2018 and end on March 28, 2019. * Students in grade 3, 4, and 5 will focus on reading/writing strategies and skills. There will be 20 students in each class. The program will include all students in the five progression levels. The purpose of this program is to develop English academic language acquisition with focus on reading and math performance standards, specifically CCSS. The goal of the teachers in these after- school classes is support students in developing language skills that will enable them to function effectively in their monolingual classrooms and to gain confidence in their ability to perform to the common core state standards. The program is also designed to prepare students for the NYSESLAT. This supplemental program will be served by 3 teachers, where the teachers hold NYS certification in TESOL (Teaching English to Students of Other Languages). * Students in the Early Childhood grades, specifically in K, 1, and 2 will attend this program to gain extra support on phonological awareness and development, the alphabetic principle, letter and sound correspondences, decoding, early reading and writing skills, oral language, and comprehension. Students will also focus on math performance standards by utilizing math concepts and strategies for problem solving. The goal of the teachers in these after school classes is to develop language skills that will enable students to function effectively in their regular classrooms and to gain confidence in their ability to perform to the common core state standards. The program is also designed to prepare students for the NYSESLAT. The program will be served by 2 teachers, where the teachers hold NYS certification in TESOL (Teaching English to Students of Other Languages). In order to reach and support our ELLs: * All ELLs are encouraged to attend the program * Materials to be used with the after-school program will be purchased with other funds, NOT from Title III. 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information * Books and materials that include online resources to be used with the 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade students include: o Comprehensive Reading Assessment by Options - which diagnosis, instructs, gives practice and assesses reading o Ready Writing - supplement to our core literacy program that offers explicit, systematic instruction in informative/explanatory, opinion, and narrative writing o iReady Diagnostic and Instruction - intensive reading and math supplement that combines a valid and reliable growth measure and individualized instruction o New York State Mathematics - understanding math processes and strategies for problem solving * Books and materials that include online resources to be used with the K, 1st, and 2nd grade students include: o Sadlier Phonics (Levels K, A, B) - phonics practice o The Continental Press: Practice Exercises in Basic English (Levels A, B, C) - grammar practice and use o iReady Diagnostic and Instruction - intensive reading and math supplement that combines a valid and reliable growth measure and individualized instruction Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development and Learning Opportunities are on-going. Title III Program teachers participate in training with special focus on EDAT (ELL Data Analysis Tool), preparation and scoring for NYSITELL and NYSESLAT, Wonders Reading program, GoMath!, Algebra for All, iReady Diagnostic and Instruction, Benmark Universe, Writing Pathways, NYCDOE K-5 Passport to Social Studies, ELL and SWD Strategies for Best Practices, Mathletics, ixL, and Fundations. The professional development plan for ELL personnel is current and maintained every year. Teachers are encouraged to attend workshops to maintain CTLE hours as per UFT Contract and continue to learn additional strategies and stay abreast of current trends. Participants of these ongoing workshops include content area teachers, the guidance counselor, special education providers, service providers, paraprofessionals, school secretaries and the parent coordinator. Ongoing professional development will continue to be implemented for all staff, specifically on the first Mondays of every month from 2:30-3:40. Strategies and analysis of the ELL program will be shared with all classroom teachers and support personnel. These trainings will support all our students as these strategies and best practices will support our ELL students in making progress in all areas of language development and English literacy skills. The principal, assistant principals, and ENL teachers will provide professional development using the LAP learning packages and the ELL Policy and Reference Guide. The discussion will include ENL learning strategies to meet the Common Core State Standards and all components of the Language Allocation Policy. Portions of the LAP video and powerpoint will be viewed to provide members of the team and personnel of ENL at the school level with information on the 0  Part C: Professional Development features of the Stand-Alone and the Intergrated ENL classes. Participants of these ongoing workshops include content area teachers, the guidance counselor, special education providers, service providers, paraprofessionals, school secretaries and the parent coordinator. Strategies and analysis of the ELL program will be shared with all classroom teachers. We provide in-service training to all personnel providing instruction or other services to such pupils in order to enhance their appreciation for the pupils' native languages and cultures and their ability to provide appropriate instructional and support services. The ENL teachers, Ms. Kathryn Borowy, Ms. Marian W.Y. Kudo, Mrs. Lisa Strippoli, Ms. Alice Wong, and Ms. Gina Puzio will provide teachers with strategies for use in the classroom to enhance language acquisition and literacy skills for our ELL student body. The PD plan for all ENL teachers, as well as the plan for facilitating PD among classroom and content area teachers to support ELLs in the development of academic language is the use of ENL methodologies to scaffold understanding. Professional development takes place on designated Chancellor’s Conference Day for Staff Development in September, November, and June. PD is also provided on a monthly basis at Principal’s Staff meetings as well as monthly grade conferences with vertical and horizontal teams. For the new school year, our tentative schedule for Professional Development include the minimum 7.5 hours of ELL training for all staff will be on the first Mondays of every month from 2:30-3:40: September: Initial Enrollment and ELL Identification Procedures, Presenter: Ms. Kudo, ENL Teacher October: ELL Strategies in the Classroom, Presenter: Mrs. Strippoli, ENL Teacher November: How to Integrate ENL in CoTeaching Models, Presenters: Ms. Kudo and Mrs. Strippoli, ENL Teachers December: Inquiry Data and Analysis with Focus on ELL Students, Presenter: Ms. Gina Puzio and Ms. Alice Wong, ENL Teachers January: Technology Based Programs for ELLs, Presenter: Ms. Borowy, ENL Teacher, and Ms. Miller, Teachnology Coach February: Integrating iReady, Presenter: Ms. Strippoli, ENL Teacher March: Co-Teaching: How to Have a Successful Push-in ENL Model, Presenters: Ms. Kudo and Ms. Alice Wong, ENL Teachers April: Preparing for the NYSESLAT, Presenters: Mrs. Strippoli, ENL Teacher, and Ms. Gina Puzio, ENL Teachers May: ELL and SWD Instructional Practices, Presenters: Ms. Borowy, ENL Teacher June: Teaching Young English Language Learners, Presenter: Mrs. Strippoli, ENL Teacher A certificate is issued to the teachers after the completion of the 7.5 hours, as per Jose P. Teachers are encouraged to keep their certificate in their teacher file and as part of their 100 hours of professional development. Records will be maintained in the Principal's office as all agendas and attendance sheets are maintained for compliance. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 1  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: PS 66 creates a welcoming environment for families and take advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. The staff of our school welcomes, values, and incorporates families and the larger community into our school and classrooms. PS 66 have a commitment to build strong partnerships with business and community-based organizations that enrich the school and the entire school community. Monthly professional development for parents will be provided by district and parent coordinators. These professional development sessions will focus on school life for students, curriculum standards, assessments, and health and medical issues for families. Professional Development is provided by professionals at monthly PTA meetings in areas of health, school curriculum, assessment and other matters pertaining to family social and educational issues. Professional Development is provided for parents on the School Leadership Team (SLT) in order to assist team members in making informed decisions about school matters. ELL Professional Development: Regional monthly ENL/Bilingual professional development will be made available to all parents of ELLs. Parents will be afforded opportunities to learn about NYS-ENL/ELA Common Core State Standards, instructional strategies, NYS assessments given to their children, and new initiatives such as iReady and other purchased online components for home access. Professional Development for Parents with Students with Disabilities: Monthly professional development will be made available to all parents of students with disabilities. Parents will be afforded opportunities to learn about NYS Common Core State Standards, instructional strategies and NYS assessments given to their children. P.S. 66, Q., is committed to developing and implementing a parent policy that fosters a partnership between the home, school, and community. We have identified six key areas that contribute to a partnership that supports greater student achievement: * The school will join parents in providing for the health and safety of their children, and in the maintenance of a home environment that encourages learning and positive behavior in schools. * The school will provide training and information to help families understand their children’s development and how to support the changes that their children undergo. * The school will reach out to provide parents with information about school programs and student progress. This will include phone calls, report cards, parent conferences, as well as new information on topics like school choice. Communication will be in a form that families find comprehensible and useful. * Parents can make a significant contribution to the environment and functioning of our school. Our school will encourage parent volunteerism and make every effort to match the experience and talents of our parents to the needs of the school. * With the guidance and support of the school, family members can assist their children with homework and other school related activities. Our school will encourage parents to join in learning activities at home (library cards, home reading corner, Parent Teacher Association (PTA) resource centers, book sales, following directions, reading recipes, Dial-A-Teacher, etc.) * The school will work to assist parents in having meaningful roles in the school decision-making process. The school will provide parents with training and information so they can make the most of this opportunity, such as gaining access to support services by other agencies, such as health care, Supplemental Educational Services (SES), Academic Intervention Services (AIS), and childcare programs. Parents are encouraged to attend PTA meetings that will be held at times that are convenient for parents. A rotational schedule of PTA meetings will be developed in coordination with the PTA executives and the school in order to accommodate parents that cannot attend evening meetings only. When necessary, translators will be available, so those parents will understand all of the proceedings at PTA meetings. Additional accommodations will be made for parents with disabilities so that they, too, can attend meetings. 2  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Through the efforts of the Parent Coordinator, the PTA President with district-wide support, an outreach will be made to parents of students in temporary housing (STH) so that these families will be involved in all parent/school activities. Parents will be invited to attend culminating celebrations marking their child’s success at the school. Such events include Literacy Night, Fast Forward, and Multicultural Celebration. Student of the month celebrations will be held in conjunction with PTA meetings and a Principal's Honor Roll Assembly will be held at the end of each marking period. School publications (i.e. pamphlets, newsletters, letters to parents, twitter, P.S. 66's website) will be used to apprise parents of important upcoming events including testing dates, school events and open school. The school calendar is disseminated each month to all parents, two weeks before the start of the month in the students' home language. At Open House, the parents of English Language Learners/Multilanguage Learners (ELL/MLL), will receive an orientation session on common core state standards assessment programs, school expectations and general program requirements for bilingual education and/or ENL programs. Using the data recorded in ATS based on the home language survey, annual school report, blue emergency card indicators, discussions at school leadership meetings and PTA meetings, and daily parent teacher contact, we assess the school’s need for written translation and oral interpretation. During the school day, we use staff to translate. In the event we find the need for a translator, the NYCDOE Interpretation and Translation Services will be utilized or an outside agency will be contracted to work with us. During our school review parents and teachers indicate a need to translate all letters and monthly newsletters into various languages. We utilize translators during these activities in order to reach and involve all our parents. The school always provides written translation services by the parent coordinator, the ENL teachers, other staff and volunteer parents to translate letters to parents. Translated notices keep parents informed of important events being conducted in the school. We will monitor and maintain a folder containing samples of translated letters and scheduled meetings. Translated Bill of Parents’ Rights and Responsibilities are included in what is disseminated to parents. We provide written translation on all documents as provided by the DOE website to those parents in need of translations. Copies of these documents are kept with the parent coordinator and in the main office at all times. As in the past, we will provide translation services by an outside vendor when necessary or as provided by the DOE. The school provides oral interpretation services as well. Our parent coordinator and other staff members conduct bi-monthly meetings to keep parents informed of changes within curriculum. Curriculum planning, pacing and discussing individual needs are needed to achieve high standards. Our school has many in-house people to interpret during scheduled meetings to translate English to Spanish or other languages. Our SBST is also bilingual and provides translations for mandated services. Our parent coordinator and other staff are always available to provide translation when needed. When necessary, we provide services with an outside vendor as contracted by the DOE. Translation service funds provided by the DOE will be used for in-house interpreters to translate at PTA meetings and parent teacher conferences/events or to be made available for the hiring of an outside vendor to perform the services needed. This will allow parents to understand standardized exams, informal assessments, or simply to stay abreast of all communications between school and the community. All important documents are provided in translated form. They are distributed from the main office. The parent coordinator also maintains a file of these documents in her office. Parental notices are sent in English and other target languages informing parents of the availability of translation and interpretation services at the school. In addition, a copy of such notice will be posted in a prominent location near the main office of the school. For the school year, parent engagement activities include: 3  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities September: Getting Your ELL/MLL Child Ready for the New School Year, Presenters: Ms. Vidal, Parent Coordinator and Mrs. Sheehan, Assistant Principal November: Supporting the ELL/MLL Child, Presenters: Ms. Kudo, ENL Teacher, and Ms. Vidal, Parent Coordinator January: English Language Classes, Presenter: Ms. Vidal, Parent Coordinator February: Common Core State Standards for the ELL Student, Presenter: Mrs. Strippoli, ENL Teacher March: Preparing the ELL Student for the NYS Exams, Presenters: Mrs. Strippoli and Ms. Borowy, ENL Teachers April: Familiarizing Parents with the NYSESLAT Format and Expectations, Presenters: Mrs. Strippoli and Ms. Kudo, ENL Teachers May: Annual Literacy Night: ELL Literacy, Presenter: Ms. Kudo, ENL Teacher and Mrs. Webster, AIS Teacher (*tentative schedule) Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 4 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. TOTAL 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Queens District 27 School Name Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis School School Number 066 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Helen DeSario Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Marian Wing Yan Kudo Teacher/Subject Area Lisa Strippoli Teacher/Subject Area Katherine Borowy Related-Service Provider Shannon Quinn /SETSS Teacher Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal Mrs. Sheehan and Ms. Howell Coach type here School Counselor Fallon Panetta Parent Ana Ramirez Parent Coordinator Francisca Vidal Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 N/A Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification N/A 2 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions N/A 5 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program N/A Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program N/A D. Student Demographics 6  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 525 Total number of ELLs 145 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 27.62% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses NYSITELL, Wonders Reading Program (Common Core Aligned), Wonder Works Reading Program for ELLs Unit Assessments (Common Core Aligned), GoMath Fall/Spring Benchmarks, Fountas and Pinnell Fall/Winter/Spring Benchmarks, Fundations, Math Baseline, iReady initial/final assessments weekly conference logs during guided reading, PPR Goals, content exit slips and Rosetta Stone to guide instructional planning for our ELLs. The data provides insight into each ELL in terms of understanding and in using the four modalities (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) necessary to be English competent. As an initial assessment, the NYSITELL provides insight as to what the student's proficiency level is when entering the program. The Wonders Assessments provide data on the student's comprehension skills and reading strategies. Fountas and Pinnell provide the teacher with information as to how the student 7  decodes and comprehends on independent leveled text. Weekly conference logs during Guided Reading allow the teacher insight into how the student is making progress in reading throughtout the school year. Fountas and Pinnell provide the teacher with information as to how the student decodes and comprehends on independent leveled text. GoMath Benchmarks are used to distribute information regarding students’ understanding of concepts and content as described by our school’s curriculums and pacing calendar. Fountas and Pinnell provides data on each of our students’ progress triannually. The integration of iReady supports instruction by capturing specific item analysis. Other reports that supplement formative data include the RLAT and EDAT. Both reports provide insight into how the student has progressed from the previous spring. The EDAT helps to illustrate individual student’s strengths and challenges by providing highlights into the student’s exam history and their performance on such tasks. Rosetta Stone supplements data to show the student's language development as it progresses throughout the academic year. The data provides insight on how each student learns and what instructinal plans would work best for each individual student. With this data the ENL teachers along with the classroom teachers, AIS/RTI teachers are able to form a plan that meets the needs of each student. First, the ENL teacher creates a schedule that ensures each child receives the instructional time in the standalone and intergrated classrooms as required. Then the ENL and classroom teachers are able to form small groups, provide students with leveled readers, initiate conference with students to ascertain individual goals, and create rubrics and checklists that match the content and language objectives for each group and individual assignment. Small groups are fluid and are formed based on informal and formal assessments that are given on a regular basis. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The PS 66 community work closely together to ensure students are meeting their academic needs. Vertical and horizontal teams collect and disseminate information. The data specialist and the testing coordinator work closely together with administration to decide the best formative and summative assessments to be implemented for the school year. ENL teachers and Special Education teachers work cohesively with the teams to prepare for assessments and to ensure that formative and summative assessments and results are in place. Google Drive is utilized in our school to keep living documents active for all teachers and faculty to participate for analyzing, adding, editing, and targeting purposes. Each member of the PS 66 community is an active participant in each of the students’ academic development. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our school uses NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, results from the New York State ELA, Math, and Science exams, NYCDOE Writing Performance Tasks, NYCDOE Math Performance Tasks, to summatively assess progress and areas of needs. The data provides insight into each of our ELLs in terms of understanding and in using the four modalities (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) necessary to be English competent. As an initial assessment, the NYSITELL provides insight as to what the student's proficiency level is when entering the program. It also provides data into the ELL’s strengths and areas of need. The NYSESLAT and NYS ELA/Math/Science exams provide the teacher with data as to how the student progressed in the previous year. All reports such as the RLAT and EDAT provide insight as to how the student have progressed, developed in their areas of strength, and their areas of need. The NYCDOE Writing and Math Performance Tasks supplement data by showing the students’ language development through writing and math consistent with the NYCDOE rubrics as outlined by the CCSS. The data provides insight on how each student learns and what instructinal plans would work best for each individual student. With this data the ENL teachers along with the classroom teachers, AIS/RTI teachers are able to form a plan that meets the needs of each student. First, the ENL teacher creates a schedule that ensures each child receives the instructional time in the standalone and intergrated classrooms as required. Then, the ENL and classroom teachers form small groups, provide students with homogeneous instruction, provide students with individual goals, and create rubrics and checklists that match the content and language objectives for each group and individual assignment. Small groups are fluid and are formed based on formative and summative assessments that are given on a regular basis. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, student goals are put into place and aligned to CCSS. Decisions based on this information help our teachers to organize groups for all areas of instruction. AIS/Guided Reading groups are formed from the results of the NYS ELA with supplemental data from the NYSITELL/NYSESLAT and Fountas and Pinnell. Service is provided to 8  those students who scored at and below a level two on the NYS ELA and have made limited progress on the NYSESLAT. Results from the NYS Math exam help guide the formation of AIS math groups during mathematic periods. Service is provided to students who scored at and below a level two on the NYS Math exam. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Formative and summative data are used to guide instruction for ELLs within the RTI framework. PS 66 provide Tier 1 instruction that is designed to incorporate high quality evidence-based instruction for all students. This includes instruction for ELLs and differentiated to meet our students’ diverse needs. Instruction for ELLs in English language development is provided at the Tier 1 instructional level. Results from the Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessments guide the formation of AIS and RTI plan. Students move into Tier 2 and Tier 3 if they demonstrate a need for more targeted and intensive academic support. Tier 2 instruction is provided by AIS utilizing Fountas and Pinnell and GoMath Intervention. This extra support can occur in the classroom but also in separate settings with instruction focused on specific learning targets. Tier 3 instruction occurs when students continue to struggle and show limited progress. The Tier 3 program is provided by AIS and a Special Educations provider trained in NYCDOE SPIRE and Wonder Works. Wonder Works supports struggling readers and writers through research-based, data-driven, systematic instruction. Wonders Works accelerates students back to grade-level standards and promotes literacy by building foundational skills, developing close reading skills, providing differentiated instruction with scaffolded support, and informing instruction through assessment. Tier 2 and Tier 3 instruction is tailored to meet ELLs’ language needs and is incorporated into research-based intervention strategies. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our school uses the NYSESLAT, NYS ELA, and NYS Math exams to assess the learning needs of our struggling learners. By utilizing the ELL Data Analysis and AMAO Estimator Tool (EDAT), we are able to better formulate our ELL programs and instruction. By understanding where our academic needs are for our students, we can create Standalone and Integrated ENL programs that best serve our students. The use of the EDAT is used to evaluate and inform who our struggling students are. It provides insight into targeted instruction. With this ATS tool, the ENL team, data specialist, RTI/AIS personnel review multiple sources of student achievement data, get an overview of ATS reports necessary to customize our school report, gain a deeper understanding of Title III AMAOs, and develop an RTI/AIS plan for those students who may be struggling to achieve. The RLAT also allows insight into how our students performed on the NYSESLAT in the previous spring and where their areas of needs are within the four language modalities 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? After analyzing and examining the formative and summative data, and from conversations and feedback between administration and staff members, the findings are disseminated and adjustments are made in order to create the small groups for AIS and RTI. Classroom teachers, ENL teachers, SETSS, ICT co-teachers receive the data to begin the discussion and formation of RTI/AIS groups for those students. In our RTI plan, student work is reviewed every six weeks. After the two week cycle, student work is assessed and evaluated for further screening. If progress is made, the student stays in his or her tier level. However, if the findings show that progress has not been made, the student will move to the next tier or an evaluation will be conducted, if necessary. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 9  regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL instruction is delivered for all ELLs as required under CR Part 154.2 and 154.3. Entering students receive 360 minutes, where 180 are standalone ENL and 180 minutes are integrated are ENL/ELA. Emerging students receive 360 minutes, where 90 minutes are standalone ENL, 180 minutes are integrated/ENL/ELA and 90 flexible minutes. Transitioning students will receive 180 minutes per week with 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA and 90 flexible minutes. Expanding students will receive 180 integrated minutes in ENL/ELA or other content area. Commanding students will receive 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Teaching materials are differentiated in each program according to the students’ progression levels. Instruction will follow the same skills and strategies that are introduced state wide. The monthly focus for math and literacy are reinforced at these levels. Students in the freestanding ENL programs receive all instruction in English with native language support. The number of ENL instructional units that a student receives is regulated by New York State CR Part 154.2 and 154.3 regulations and determined by student English-proficiency levels (as determined by the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT scores). The goals of the ENL program are as follows: • Provide academic content-area instruction in English • Use ENL methodology and instructional strategies • Use native language support to make content comprehensible • Incorporate ENL strategic instruction • Assist students to achieve the state-designated level of English proficiency for their grade • Help ELLs meet or exceed New York State and City standards In freestanding ENL programs, language arts is taught using ENL and ELA methodologies. Content areas are taught in English using ENL strategies through a co-teaching model. Native language support is provided through the use of glossaries for content areas and peer support. a. The organizational models used for our school are standalone and integrated. b. The program models are dependent on the proficiency levels based on the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT scores. The students are organized homogeneously and heterogeneously based on proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL instruction is delivered for all ELLs as required under CR Part 154. Entering students receive 360 minutes, where 180 are standalone ENL and 180 minutes are integrated are ENL/ELA. Emerging students receive 360 minutes, where 90 minutes are standalone ENL, 180 minutes or integrated/ENL/ELA and 90 flexible minutes. Transitioning students will receive 180 minutes per week with 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA and 90 flexible minutes. Expanding students will receive 180 integrated minutes in ENL/ELA or other content area. Commanding students will receive 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. 0  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our students come from varied backgrounds and therefore receive content area instruction in core academic areas in English. Where possible, translations are provided by qualified staff and/or translators, in the native language. Our program for ELLs embodies the conceptual understanding of challenging content and well-developed learning strategies that prepare ELLs to solve problems, think critically, and communicate in their new language. ELL students in our school obtain academic language through Sheltered English Instruction, an approach in which students develop knowledge in specific subject areas through the use of their new language. Teachers modify their use of English to teach core subjects, (math, science, social studies) in order to ensure that the material is comprehensible to learners and that it promotes their new language development. They adjust the language demands of the lesson in many ways, by modifying speech rate and tone, direct instruction of vocabulary and grammar, repeating key words, phrases, or concepts, using context clues and making extensive use of modeling strategies, relating instruction to students’ background knowledge and experience, and using certain methods familiar to language teachers (demonstrations, visuals, graphic organizers, or cooperative work). Tier leveled vocabulary are integrated into lessons with scaffolded support to allow ELLs to meet benchmarks and develop language needed to make academic instruction understandable to students of different proficiency levels. All of these instructional approaches and methods make content comprehensible to enrich language development and are rigorously aligned to the Common Core State Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish students are tested with the NYSITELL in both English and in Spanish at the time of enrollment. Students can take their math and science tests in their home language when accessible and available. Go Math assessments and Wonders assessments can be printed in both English and Spanish. ENL teachers, Assistant Principals, and the Principal all have a thorough list that indicates each students home language and evaluation needs. Before ENL students are evaluated, we ensure that appropriate testing in the child's home language is provided. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status ELL students are grouped to receive services based on their level of language competency. A data driven approach using Standardized and teacher-created assessments and/or evaluations are used to determine the level of fluency for each student. ELL students participate in differentiated instruction based on proficiency level. Newcomers develop receptive language through visuals, gestures, TPR activities, think-write-pair-share, concept mapping, picture dictionaries and scaffolded writing activities.Intermediate students participate in the previous activities, in addition to text retelling, talk alouds, cooperative learning and role play activities. Advanced ELLs use jigsaw and graphic organizers frequently, as well as the other activities used with the intermediate students. There is a big emphasis on academic language acquisition and Rosetta Stone is used as an added support to second language acquisition for all proficiency levels. a. SIFE students are seen by the ENL teacher on a daily basis during the standalone and integrated models. We facilitate their adjustment to the new surroundings. The student develops language skill that will enable them to function effectively in their regular classroom. In addition, the teacher emphasizes and supports self-esteem and confidence as they adapt to a new culture. The ENL teacher shares strategies with the classroom teacher to meet the needs of these students within the confines of the classroom. Additional support is provided by an AIS provider or as described by the RTI plan. b. Newcomers receive 360 minutes with one unit in ENL and another unit ELA. They are provided with Rosetta Stone access to help with language acquisition. They are paired with students of their home language for peer support in the classroom. 1  c. ELL students receiving four to six years of service continue to receive ENL services dependent on their level of language competency. They are provided with English language instruction and instruction in the content areas of math, science, and social studies. d. Long term ELL students will be provided with English language instruction and instruction in the content areas of math, science, and social studies. e. Former ELLs are permitted to receive testing accommodations for up to two years after scoring commanding on the NYSESLAT. They receive 90 minutes of integrated support in ENL/ELA or content area or other approved services with flexiblilty dependent on the students' needs. Service can be provided in those content areas. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Online programs such as Rosetta Stone, BrainpopESL, BenchmarkUniverse, newsomatic, and Passport to Social Studies Core Curriculum provide technology based instruction and access to academic content areas to accelerate English language development. Reading programs such as Wonder Works, leveled guided reading books based on Wonders unit of study, Fundations Phonics Program, and Text Connections provide differentiated and leveled instruction needed to meet the needs of our ELL-SWDs. Ms. Marian Kudo, Mrs. Lisa Strippoli, Ms. Katherine Borowy, Ms. Gina Puzio, and Ms. Alice Wong provide ENL instruction to ELLs with integrated and standalone services. The service providers use the materials listed above along with leveled vocabulary books to provide students with access to differentiated academic instruction and English langauge development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P.S66Q uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWD to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. Special education programs and mandated services are delivered. An IEP team determines a student's eligibility for special education services and the language in which special education programs and services are delivered. ELLs who are also students with disabilities receive accommodations from the classroom, ENL, and special education teachers that apply to ELL-SWDs. Both the classroom and ENL teacher plan instruction that alignes with the Common Core Standards. Also, teachers form lessons that will allow students to meet their IEP and ENL goals by June. This is done by using manipulatives, teaching in small group, using picture clues, using leveled readers, assessing formally and informally. The instructional plan when co-teaching follows the model of: engaging, pre-assessment, modeling, whole group, small group, whole group, assessment. This plan allows for the students to learn not only from the teacher, but also from their peers. This model also allows the teachers so assess which students are approaching, on-level, and beyond grade level within each individual topic of study. Based on the pre-assessment the teacher is able to form her small group. In the small group the teacher provides students with differentiated activities and extra support. The instructional plan when pulling the students out is to reflect what the students are learning in the classroom. However, the ENL teacher uses supplementary material when teaching her groups of students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The school has targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas. 2  Entering/Emerging Students: Entering: 360 Minutes of instruction---180 minutes standalone, 180 minutes integrated Emerging: 360 Minutes of instruction--- 90 minutes standalone, 180 integrated, 90 flexible Leveled small group instruction Rosetta Stone Levels 1-2 Destination Reading Brainpop ESL Wonder Works (per grade level) Wonders Assessments (English and Spanish) Wonders/Wonder Works practice books Leveled Readers (approaching and ELL) Wilsons Fundations Phonics Program Differentiated assessments (graphic organizers, focus sheets, picture charts) Sadlier Phonics Levels K-A Leveled Vocabulary Links Books Go Math Leveled assignments (English and Spanish) Writing Pathways Text Connections BenchmarkUniverse.com newsomatic.org NYCDOE K-5: Passport to Social Studies Core Curriculum Transitioning/Expanding Transitioning:180 Minutes of instruction---0 standalone, 90 integrated, 90 flexible Expanding:180 Minutes of instruction---0 standalone, 180, integrated Leveled small group instruction Rosetta Stone Level 2 Destination Reading Brainpop ESL Wonder Works (per grade level) Wonders Assessments (English and Spanish) Wonders/Wonder Works practice books Leveled Readers (on level and ELL) Wilsons Fundations Phonics Program Differentiated assessments (graphic organizers, focus sheets, picture charts) Sadlier Phonics Levels A-B Leveled Vocabulary Links Books Go Math Leveled assignments (English and Spanish) Writing Pathways Text Connections BenchmarkUniverse.com newsomatic.org NYCDOE K-5: Passport to Social Studies Core Curriculum Commanding 90 Minutes of instruction---0 standalone, 90 integrated Leveled small group instruction Rosetta Stone Level 3 Destination Reading Brainpop ESL Wonder Works (per grade level) 3  Wonders Assessments (English and Spanish) Wonders/Wonder Works practice books Leveled Readers (on level, advanced, and ESL) Wilsons Fundations Phonics Program Differentiated assessments (graphic organizers, focus sheets, picture charts) Sadlier Phonics Levels B-Up Leveled Vocabulary Links Books Go Math Leveled assignments (English and Spanish) Writing Pathways Text Connections BenchmarkUniverse.com newsomatic.org NYCDOE K-5: Passport to Social Studies Core Curriculum 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? P.S66Q has changed our program to meet the new requirements in regards to the amount of minutes entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding students need. We have adopted the usage of Google Docs in order to plan across the grades with the classroom teacher. With Google Docs all pedagogy in the school are able to share and access lesson plans, graphic organizers, and data sheets.We have also implemented a common prep period in order to plan lessons with the classroom teacher that is designed for ELL students. For the 2017-19 school years, PS 66 will be continuing with the reading program, Wonders, along with its aligned writing program supplemented by Writing Pathways. Teachers and students will have also have access to Text Connections, BenchmarkUniverse.com, and newsomatic.org. As for our social studies curriculum, students will make self to world connections through the NYCDOE K-5: Passport to Social Studies Core Curriculum. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. These programs include Morning Institute, Boys and Girls Club, and ENL Academy, ENL Clubs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Leveled small group instruction Rosetta Stone Levels 1-3 Destination Reading BrainPop/BrainPopJr/BrainPopESL Wonder Works (per grade level) Wonders Assessments (English and Spanish) Wonders/Wonder Works practice books Leveled Readers (approaching, on level, advanced, and ENL) Wilsons Fundations Phonics Program Differentiated assessments (graphic organizers, focus sheets, picture charts) Sadlier Phonics Level K-B 4  Leveled Vocabulary Links Books Go Math Leveled assignments (English and Spanish) Writing Pathways Text Connections BenchmarkUniverse.com newsomatic.org NYCDOE K-5: Passport to Social Studies Core Curriculum 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL program home language support is delivered by providing parents with the new ENL home language survery. Support staff and pedagogues are present when the home language survey is given to the parents to ensure that their questions can be answered in their home language. Based on their home language interpretation and translation will be provided to parents in all meetings and letters home. Students' home language support is provided through the use of alternate placement paraprofessionals who have been assigned according to IEPs, peer support, translated glossaries for content areas, and the use of Google Translate, when applicable. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. An in-depth curriculum map has been created and shared with all pedagogues mapping out the ELA and math curriculum for the 2017-2019 school year. This allows all pedagogues to have access to the overall plan, theme, units, Common Core Standards, and assessments that will be given throughout the school year. With this, teachers are better able to plan and differentiate. Also, teachers use their common prep periods to plan with the classroom teachers. The ENL and classroom teachers use the Common Core Learning Standards to form the objectives of the lesson. Then, the ENL teacher differentiates each lesson to meet the needs of the ELL students. Along with differentiated organizers created by the teacher, the teacher also uses Wonder Works and leveled readers that correspond to the curriculum being learned in the classroom. By planning with the classroom teacher based on the Wonders Curriculum and Common Core Standards, we ensure that all the resources correspond with the ELLs ages and grade level along with the content area and language standards. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Activities that assist newly enrolled ELLs or ELLs that are enrolled throughout the school year include a walk throughout the building. This allows students and parents to become comfortable with our school building. We also introduce parents and students to their teachers. This allows time for parents to ask any questions they may have for the teacher or principal. The parent coordinator meets with the parents to inform them of updates about lunch, uniform and other school policies. The parent coordinator provides parents with school calendars informing them of upcoming events, PTA meetings, special days, etc. These calendars go home to parents every month. The guidance counselor also meets with the parents and students to explain our school policies. The school also invites all parents to the school in June for "Fast Forward Night". Here, parents are introduced to classroom teachers of the new school year and are introduced to the new grade's curriculums. ENL teachers, special education teachers, and mandated service providers are also available to share resources and answer any questions 5  parents may have. In addition, both students and parents are provided with an informational packet that tells parents the skills, strategies and language/content curricula that will be taught the next school year. This stepping-up packet provides information regarding reading strategies, math strategies, online websites, and best practices for students to complete throughout summer recess. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? English/ENL 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The Principal, Mrs. Helen DeSario, Assistant Principals Mrs. Patricia Sheehan and Ms. Nakia Howell, and ENL Teachers Marian Wing Yan Kudo, Lisa Strippoli and Katherine Borowy provide professional development using the learning packages for LAP, Title III Funds, Title III Supplemental Funds for Immigrants, and Language Translation Interpretation Plan. Other professional development that is turn keyed are trainings from district and from city-wide initiatives. Staff is provided with a minimum of fifteen percent of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80. These professional developments are dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For the ENL teachers, fifty percent of the professional developments are focused on the topic of language acquisition in the classroom. The trainings also include ENL Learning Standards, components of the Language Allocation Policy, including the ELA/ENL aligned Common Core State Standards, acquisition and sustainability of academic language, differentiated instruction models for the integrated classroom, and writing of content and language objectives in the monolingual classrooms. Portions of the Parent Information video will be viewed to provide members of the team and personnel of ELLs with information on the features of the ENL class. Participants of these ongoing workshops include subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, school secretaries and the parent coordinator. Ongoing professional development will be implemented for all staff. Strategies and analysis of the ELL program will be shared with all classroom teachers. We provide in-service training to all personnel providing instruction or other services to such pupils in order to enhance their appreciation for the pupils' home languages and cultures and their ability to provide appropriate instructional and support services. Some topics that are discussed for professional development include Schools Policy and Curriculum, Incorporating the CCSS in the ENL classroom, Designing Quality Instructional Programs of ELLs, Using online resources in the classroom, Utilizing Home Language Supports and Resources in the classroom, Current ELL Trends and Changes, EDAT, the RtI Plan for the ELL/ELL-SWDs, and Referring ELLs for Evaluations. In addition, technology is used during these trainings to enhance our own understanding and use of the Smart Boards, ipads, Promethean Boards, and laptops. We also work with our teachers on accessing information and ELL friendly websites and programs to use with our students. In order to support ELLs as they engage in the Common Core State Standards, teachers of ELLs are encouraged to attend Division of English Language Learners (DELLSS) and Queens South Field Support Center (QSFSC) workshops to enhance their ENL practices and instruction. The guidance counselor participates in the ENL workshops provided by the ENL teachers who 6  turnkey information from various trainings. ENL teachers share ideas and information with the guidance counselor who will provide necessary information for ENL students to transition from elementary school to middle school. Some topics that are covered during professional development are: Identifying ELLs, School's Policy and Curriculum, Incorporating the CCSS in the ELL classroom, Utilizing Home Language Support in the classroom, and current ELL trends and changes. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We provide all teachers and administrators with at least fifteen percent of the required professional development hours for all teachers which are dedicated to language acquisition. Topics that are covered during professional development are: Co-teaching strategies and integrated language and content instruction for ELLs, Schools Policy and Curriculum, Incorporating the CCLS in the ELL classroom, Designing Quality Instructional Programs of ELLs, Using online reources in the classroom, Utilizing Native Language in the classroom, Current ELL Trends and Changes, AMAO I, II, and III, When to refer ELL students for Disability Evaluations. Training in the utilization of technology in the classroom is provided for classroom teachers in using Smart Boards, iPads, Laptops, desktops with various ELL programs to enhance learning and differentiating instruction for our ELL students. All ELL professional development records are maintained with the principal in the main office. Sign-in sheets and agendas are contained in a binder in the main office. All teachers must sign-in prior to the workshops. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P.S. 66 Queens is committed to developing and implementing a parent policy that fosters a partnership between the home, school and community. Ms. Kudo, Mrs. Strippoli, and Mrs. Borowy individually meet with parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians. At these meetings the teachers and parents discuss the goals of the ENL program, their child’s English language development progression, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. A qualified interpreter/translator is always present at the meetings to assist parents with the interpretation/translation. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. • Parents are encouraged to make a significant contribution to the school community. Our school encourages parent volunteerisms and make every effort to match the experience and talents of our parents to the needs of the school. • With the guidance and support of the school, family members can assist their children with homework and other school related activities. Our school encourages parents to join in learning activities at home (library cards, home reading corner, Parent Teacher Association (PTA) resource centers, book sales, following directions, reading recipes, etc.) • The school also assists parents in having meaningful roles in the school decision-making process. The school provides parents 7  with training and information so they can make the most of this opportunity. • The school helps parents gain access to support services by other agencies, such as health care, Supplemental Educational Services (SES), Academic Intervention Services (AIS), childcare programs, private bussing, and tutoring programs • Parents are encouraged to attend PTA meetings that are held at times that are convenient for parents. A rotational schedule of PTA meetings is developed in coordination with the PTA executives and the school in order to accommodate parents that cannot attend evening meetings. When necessary, interpretors are available, so those parents will understand all of the proceedings at PTA meetings. Additional accommodations are made for parents with disabilities so that they, too, can attend. • Through the efforts of the Parent Coordinator, the PTA President, School Leadership Team, an outreach is made to parents of students in temporary housing (STH) so that these families will be involved in all parent/school activities. • Parents are invited to attend culminating celebrations marking their child’s success at the school (Literacy Night, Fast Forward Night, Career Day, Surprise Reader, Multicultural Celebration, Project LEAP, Science Fair, ). • Student of the month celebrations are held in conjunction with PTA meetings and an Honor’s Assembly will be held at the end of each marking period. • School publications (i.e. pamphlets, newsletters, school website, teacher websites, and letters to parents) are used to apprise parents of important upcoming events including testing dates, school events and open school. • The school calendar is disseminated each month to all parents before the start of the new month. • At Open House, the parents of English Language Learners/Limited English Proficiency (ELL/LEP) students receive an orientation on standardized assessments, school expectations and general program requirements for bilingual education and/or ENL programs. • Parent workshops focus on basic educational concerns, health care, and financial planning. • The school also offers the following professional development for parents: Monthly professional development for parents provided by district and school based parent coordinator. This professional development will focus on school life for students, curriculum standards, assessments, health and medical issues for families. • Professional Development is provided by professionals at monthly PTA meetings in areas of health, school curriculum, assessment and other matters pertaining to family social and educational issues. • Professional Development is provided for parents on the School Leadership Team (SLT) in order to assist team members in making informed decisions about school matters. • ELL Parent Engagement: Quarterly ENL Parent Engagement is available to all parents of ELLs. Parents are afforded opportunities to learn about Common Core State Standards, instructional strategies, NYS assessments, and new ENL initiatives • Students with Disabilities Parent Engagement: Quarterly SWD Parent Engagement to support our parents of students with disabilities. Parents will be afforded opportunities to learn about NYS standards, instructional strategies, NYS assessments, and strategies to aid their ELL-SWDs. • Annual Evaluation of the Parent Involvement Policy: At the end of each year, the school's parent involvement policy will be evaluated for its usefulness in meeting the needs of all parents of students at the school. This evaluation will be coordinated with the executives of the PTA and the school's parent 8  coordinator and administration. Furthermore, on every Tuesday, parents of ELL students are called, written to, and or invited to attend meetings with an ENL teacher. At these meetings teachers, ENL teachers, and parents discuss the data that has been collected by formative and summative assessments, informal observations, to discuss a student’s progress. An interpretor is readily available if necessary. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Helen DeSario, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 66Q School DBN: 27Q066 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Helen DeSario Title Principal Mrs. Sheehan Assistant Principal Francisca Vidal Parent Coordinator Marian W. Y. Kudo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ana Ramirez Lisa Strippoli Parent Teacher/Subject Area Katherine Borowy Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Fallon Panetta School Counselor Mary Barton N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Shannon Quinn Other SETSS Provider N/A N/A Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/12/17 09/12/17 09/12/17 09/12/17 09/12/17 09/12/17 09/12/17 N/A N/A 09/12/17 09/12/17 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q066 School Name: Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis School Superintendent: Mary Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Marian Wing Yan Kudo Lisa Francisca Strippoli Vidal ENL Teacher ENL Teacher Parent Coordinator Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Using the data recorded in ATS, specifically the RAPL, this report shows the languages the parents prefer for both written and oral communication. In conjunction with the RAPL, PS 66 utilizes the HLIS (Home Language Identification Survey), annual school reports, blue emergency card indicators, discussions at school leadership meetings and PTA meetings, daily parent teacher contact, to assess the school’s need for written translation and oral interpretation. During the school day, we use staff members to translate and to interpret. In the event we find the need for an interpreter, PS 66 utilizes over-the phone-interpretation via the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. We also contract outside agencies to work with us. During our school review, parents and teachers indicate a need to translate all letters and monthly newsletters into Spanish and other languages 2  available. Interpreters as well as school personnel who are able to translate and interpret are made available during individual parent-teacher conferences to ensure progress in instruction. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Arabic Chinese Bangla Punjabi Polish Russian Urdu Cantonese Mandarin Oneida 416 222 17 11 8 1 3 2 1 0 0 1 61 32.55 2.49 1.61 1.17 0.15 0.44 0.29 0.15 0 0 0.15 409 229 18 9 8 0 3 2 1 1 1 0 59.97 33.58 2.64 1.32 1.17 0 0.44 0.29 0.15 0.15 0.15 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Monthly School Calendars Sept-June Letters from the Principal On-Going Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. school-based personnel and/or translation vendor school-based personnel and/or translation vendor 3  Event Notices On-Going Admissions, Readmissions, Transfer and List Notice for All Students At Registration/On-Going HLIS At Registration/On-Going Parent Survey & Program Selection Form On-Going Entitlement Letter On-Going Continued Entitlement Letter On-Going Non Entitlement Letter On-Going Placement Letter After Receiving Parent Survey On-Going Program Placement Default Letter - Selection Form Not Returned On-Going Health Forms and Notices At Registration/On-Going school-based personnel and/or translation vendor DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed 4  Immunization Information At Registration/On-Going School Closure DOE Closures Exam Notification Letters Apri/May/June Emergency Contact Card Sept/On-Going Opt-Out Forms/Consent Forms Sept/On-Going Title III Programs Monthly Newsletters When Made Available/Oct/Nov Beginning of Every Month Tuesday Parent Engagement Notices One Week Before the Event Holiday Notifications On-Going Parent Teacher Conference Notification Letters Sept/Nov/Mar/May Promotion In Doubt Letters Nov/Mar/June Individualized Educational Plan (IEP) On-Going Student Report Cards Nov/Mar/June DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed school-based personnel and/or translation vendor school-based personnel and/or translation vendor DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed school-based personnel and/or translation vendor school-based personnel and/or translation vendor school-based personnel and/or translation vendor DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based 5  Recess Notifications Before the Recess personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed DOE Intranet template(s) for the ten available languages; school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent Teacher Conferences Sept/Nov/Mar/May Tuesday Parent Engagement Every Tuesday Monthly PTA Meetings Every Month SLT Meetings Every Month Individualized Educational Plan (IEP) On-Going provide interpretation service(s)? Over-the-phone interpretation services; bilingual school personnel Bilingual school personnel; parent volunteer Bilingual school personnel; parent volunteer Bilingual school personnel; parent volunteer Over-the-phone interpretation services; bilingual school personnel 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, updated emergency contact cards are made available for school personnel to reach custodial parents, legal guardians and those listed as emergency contacts to pick up students. Parents who are limited-English-proficient will be notified by bilingual school staff members who will communicate the protocols for school emergencies. In the event a school based interpreter is not available, the school will make every effort to train staff to utilize the three-way call system to add Language Line to incoming calls. The Language Line will allow school personnel to inform parents that they can call the school in their home language through the use of a phone script. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All school staff members will be made aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 through training/professional development. The Principal's designated Language Access Coordinators will conduct and turnkey 6  Chancellor's Regulation A-663, explaining the goal of the Translation and Interpretation Unit to afford Limited English Speaking parents access to programs and services critical to their children's education. Within the first thirty days of a student’s enrollment, the primary language spoken by the parent of each student enrolled in the school, will be determined and assigned into ATS. If the language is not English, whether the parent requires language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the school, the school will maintain an appropriate and current record of the primary language of each parent. The information will be maintained in ATS and on the student emergency card. With this regulation, PS 66 will provide translation and interpretation services to all parents who require language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the school. The school may provide translation and interpretation services beyond those outlined in the regulation in order to meet the language needs of the parents. Parents may choose to rely on an adult friend/companion or relative for language and interpretation services. Students and other children/minors under the age of 18 may not serve as interpreters for school staff and parents during any formal or informal meeting where student achievement and/or student conduct are discussed. The school is responsible for providing each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. At the main entrance of our school building, a sign in each of the covered languages, or most prominent covered languages, will indicate the availability of interpretation services. The school’s safety plan will contain procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. The LACs will share further information regarding the Department’s website that will provide information in each of the covered languages as well as the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services. We will also train our staff to request language access services. As outlined on the Translation and Interpretation Unit website, in order to meet the translation and interpretation requirements set forth in this regulation, A-663, parents who wish to receive language access services will contact our school with those needs. Class lists of parents' preferred language of communication will be made available for all teachers for reference purposes. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Translation service funds provided by the DOE will be used for in-house interpreters to translate at PTA meetings and parent teacher conferences or to hire an outside vendor to perform the services needed. This will allow parents to understand standardized exams, informal assessments, and to notify parents of individual student progress. All important documents are provided in translated form. They are distributed from the main office and the parent coordinator also maintains a file of these documents in her office. Parental notices will be sent in English and other targeted languages informing parents of the availability of translation and interpretation services at the school. In 7  addition, a copy of such notices will be posted in a prominent location near the main office of the school. Our school provides information about parents' preferred language of communication on the emergency card and in ATS. A procedure is in place for ensuring that important documents are translated and sent home. We are also responsible for providing interpretation services during school hours. Parents are aware of their right to language services and are aware of the availability of language services in our school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At the end of formal/informal meetings with parents, and via feedback from parent survey, pedagogues and interpreters gather information from parents on the quality and availability of services based on question and answer. Parents who need further clarification/interpretation are able to schedule appointments to privately discuss the content of the meetings or schedule an in-school meeting with assistance from the over-the-phone interpretation services. At PTA and School Leadership Team meetings, parents and educators discuss and gather feedback from parents on the quality and use of such services. With the availability of translation and interpretations services that is made to parents, the school is made cognizant of their plan based on dialogue, conversations, meetings, and through professional developments. 8 
