 75Q075 School Name: ROBERT E. PEARY SCHOOL Principal: JAMES THORBS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Robert E. Peary 307500014075 Pre K-8 th grade School Number (DBN): 75Q075 1666 Hancock Street, Ridgewood, NY 11385 (718) 456-7588 Phone Number: (718) 628-0491 Fax: James Thorbs jthorbs@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: James Thorbs Janet Turcios Jazzy Rivera DamarisMagarin n/a n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 75 Kettler Louissaint Superintendent: 400 First Avenue, New York, NY 10010 Superintendent’s Office Address: KLouissaint@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 802-1501 Phone Number: District 75 FSC: (718) 857-0565 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jude Arthur Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 400 First Avenue Manhattan, NY 10010 JArthur2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1604 Phone Number: 718-706-4531 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) James Thorbs Janet Turcios Jazzy Rivera N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Eulalia Gonzalez Randee Gresge N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/UFT Teacher Member/UFT Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Yndira Rodriguez Yvette Armena Veronica Clemente Tonia Williams N/A Sahar Aziz N/A N/A N/A Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/UFT Teacher Member/Parent Member/Paraprofessional Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our school is an academic environment that provides a safe, nurturing, instructional setting which serves to build a foundation through the development of meaningful relationships within the school community. This foundation promotes relevant engagement in academic, social, and emotional learning and focuses on effective communication where each student can reach their maximum potential.   Our vision is that each student will become an integrated member of a multicultural society given the necessary tools to foster success. Each student will be supported within the Least Restrictive Environment where everyone belongs and is accepted. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 75 Queens, The Robert E. Peary School, is an educational community where all students are afforded rigorous instruction. The school is committed to identifying and meeting the needs of students who are emotionally, cognitively, and /or physically challenged. We strive to empower our students to meet their individual goals with the purpose of preparing them for college and career readiness and/or transitional life skills. The main site of P75Q, The Robert E. Peary School, is located in the Ridgewood section of Queens, New York, bordering the borough of Brooklyn. This pre-kindergarten through eighth grade program serves a population of 577 students. The organization includes two self-contained buildings in Ridgewood, NY, one self-contained building in Jamaica, NY and 4 additional off-sites. The off-sites include self-contained and inclusion programs at local elementary schools which include P.S.239Q, I.S. 93Q, P.S. 254Q, and 276Q. The organization serves students of varying disabilities including students on the autism spectrum, emotional disturbances, and intellectual impairment. P75Q and its associate programs endeavor to provide an educational experience unique to the needs of the students attending this school. To accomplish this end, we provide social, emotional, and instructional programs, using a multiplicity of approaches. Small classes (6:1:1, 8:1:1, 8:1:2; 12:1:1) in self-contained and inclusive settings ensure that all students have available to them a plan that addresses their individual educational needs. It is the expectation that each child will engage in activities that will empower them to achieve cognitively, creatively, emotionally, socially and prepare them for college and career readiness. In order to build school capacity, in 2018-2019 we will continue with implementation of a support system where instructional leads will work with collaborative teams to further develop best practices and model highly effective methodologies which are reflective of the Danielson Rubric. Additionally we will continue our parent/student joint visits to area colleges to expose them to the diverse opportunities that lay ahead and fortify student preparedness for that journey. The school implements numerous English Language Arts instructional programs aligned with the Common Core such as: Ready Gen; Expeditionary Learning; Reading A-Z; Reading Attainment; Unique Learning Systems; Thinking Maps; Great Leaps ELA; Fletcher's Place, I-LIT, and SRA kits. Additionally the following Common Core instructional programs are utilized in mathematics: Go Math; Connected Math; Math Attainment; Touchmath; Unique Learning systems; Thinking Maps; Math Dashboard – CMP3; and Think Central. Our Science curriculum (Foss, Glencoe, Unique) and Social Studies curriculum (Passport, Unique) provide students with opportunities to learn through scientific inquiry and research. We celebrate their culminating tasks monthly with school fairs where all students attend and all parents are encouraged to share in our multi-level exhibitions. The school offers after-school programs such as CHAMPS physical education program; Middle School Initiative utilizing programs to enrich curriculum: ST Math, Kneo World, and Animation-ish ; and an after-school ENL Program. Our teachers and students participate in music and art residencies including Learning Through an Expanded Arts Program (LEAP), an arts-based approach to teaching which allows our students to have an impact on our local community. The school in collaboration with The Trust for Public Land, and Councilman Reynoso's office has maintained a Playground and Botanical Garden at the main site for the purpose of academic enrichment, physical fitness for our students, environmental awareness and community engagement. The school has reconfigured the school day to allow for collaborative planning consistently throughout the 2018-2019 school year on every Tuesday, as well as availing staff to common prep periods to meet with their team. Thinking Maps training is provided to diverse leveled teacher groups monthly in order to intergrate the Language For Learning as a schoolwide initiative. Additioally a professional development committee, representing the diverse stakeholders on staff will address the needs of the staff in conjunction with administrative imput to schedule professional 0  development workshops which target and support newly acquired customized instructional programs, methodologies, and assessments as well as the evolution of informed teaching best practices. As a means of supporting our students in their instructional programs, a variety of pro-social and behavioral supports are implemented including the school-wide Positive Behavior Support Program titled ”The Choice Is Yours”. This program allows for an open communication system between the school and the home and facilitates parents and teachers working together to achieve targeted behavioral outcomes for students. As part of this program we have organized a student driven choice reward program in the form of clubs (Chess, Lego, Computer Design, Arts & Crafts, Basketball, and Board Games) where students further develop their socialization and communal thinking skills. We have expanded the utilization of Class DOJO, a program which supports a safe, positive learning environment, for our standard population (K-5) providing models for appropriate social emotional interactions and a component for parent involvement in monitoring students behavior. A sensory room has been established at our 48 site in order to provide students with FBA's and BIP's with sensory input in order to de-escalate inappropriate behaviors. We have also initiated a social skills program for our alternate population which has also incorporated parent involvement. An in-house Certified Therapeutic Crisis Intervention (TCI) trained staff member is present at all sites of P75Q to support teachers in developing techniques to support students in crisis. P75Q will continue to implement the Comfort Dog Pilot Program and will use the newest member of our school community and family to teach responsibility, caring outreach, and calming strategies during de-escalation trials. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our diverse population includes students K-8 who are classified as autistic, emotionally disturbed, and/or cognitively or developmentally delayed. Our class ratios include: 6:1:1, 8:1:1, 8:1:2, and 12:1:1. There is a focus on differentiated instruction and academic intervention based on students’ needs assessments. Individualized related service periods include Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, Counseling, Hearing/Vision Services and Speech which are provided as per the students IEP mandates. ENL (English as a New Language) instruction is available for students identified as Limited English Proficient. Students either participate in the full range of standardized testing with or without modifications or in the New York State Alternate Assessment. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The Robert E. Peary School has developed rigorous instruction, as defined in the Framework for Great Schools, throughout classrooms by creating customized instructional groupings which are supported by a plethora of educational materials and assessments based on student needs. The 72 classes in the school have been reorganized into four distinct educational pathways. The Pre-Kindergarten classes utilize work sampling, alternately assessed students utilize Verbal Behavior (VB) or Attainment. Standardized students utilize Common Core materials. Assessments include SANDI/FAST, Web-ABLLS, Fountas and Pinnell, Math NYC Performance Test (K-2), and Performance Series. Professional development activities for staff is specific so that teachers will have the tools and academic intervention materials that most closely match their students identified instructional needs. In order to expand upon our Strong Family and Community ties, P75Q has paralleled parent workshops to reflect instructional programs in the school. Building upon the continued positive response received in 2018-2019, P75Q will continue offerings to parents in "Get Ready to Learn", a movement-based program, which results in optimal physical, emotional, and cognitive states for learning. A Parent Support Group and monthly training program provides the social and emotional support that was deemed necessary according to parents that will support their particular concerns, including OPWDD and front door meetings. We will continue the implementation of the "Cookshop" Program for students and parents in 2018-2019, as our response in the 2017-2018 school year was extremely positive. Parent workshops in instructional programs (i.e. Thinking Maps, technology, etc.) utilized by their children will continue to be offered throughout the school year. Families of English Language Learners will continue to be supported from the school with English classes in the current school year. Additionally, the school offered academic workshops for parents to support the myriad of academic intervention services acquired by the school, and thus, 1  better prepare parents to support their child’s instructional program in the home. A focus of the school for the coming year will be to respond to our parents needs survey which will result in a fully engaged community to support students. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75Q075 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) 549 SIG Recipient (Y/N) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Drama # Music # Dance # CTE N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 79.6% % Reduced Lunch 30.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.8% 41.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 8.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 88.4% 0.5% 99.8% 30.1% 14.2% 5.8% 10 5% 7 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Area of Strength ● An analysis of teacher ratings in 2017-2018 indicates that 90.1% of teachers rated in the effective or highly effective range on their overall Measure of Teacher Practice (2.51-4.00 rating), with strengths in 1a (Demonstrating Knowledge of the Curriculum-3.41), 2a (Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport-3.65), 3c (Engaging Students in Learning-3.44), and 4e (Growing and Developing Professionally-3.62). Priority Needs ● Analysis of the various Advance System components, indicates that the following areas merit further development despite improvement in the 2017-2018 school year: Components 1E (Designing Coherent Instruction-3.34), 3B (Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques-3.33), and 3D (Using Assessment in Instruction-3.34) . On the school survey, only 33% of the teachers say that their students respond to challenging questions in class also indicating that more focus in this area is needed. These areas will continue to be targeted in 2018-2019. ● While the principal received an overall Effective/Highly Effective rating on his PPO, areas identified for development were consistent with the school’s analysis of the Advance Systems Components (i.e. development of consistency in planning, multiple entry points and utilization of questioning and discussion techniques for rigorous learning opportunities, peer to peer engagement and interactions embedded in learning, and data driven instruction). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, standardized and alternate assessment teacher teams (K-8), will achieve an average minimum rating of 3.40 on the following Danielson components: 1E-Designing Coherent Instruction; 3B-Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques Engaging Students in Learning; and 3D-Using Assessment in Instruction, as evidenced in the Measures Of Teaching Practice (MOTP) summary in ADVANCE. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school will be organized into student grade bands of K-2, 3-5, and 6-8 in both standard and alternate assessment. Teachers of Alternate and Standardized Students in grades K-8 Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Administration Coaches Instructional leaders will be identified. Following each cycle of Advance, Measure of Teacher Practice data will be analyzed for progress and needed supports by administration and reviewed with coaches and instructional leads. In September 2018, alternate and standardized teacher teams will collaboratively problem solve and design classrooms that reflect functional groupings, peer to peer interactive opportunities, inquiry, joint problem solving, and higher order thinking opportunities with scaffolded instruction reflective of the four distinct educational pathways in the school (pre-k: work sampling; Alternate Assessment - Verbal Behavior (ABLLS-R); Alternate Assessment (SANDI/FAST) - Attainment; Standard Assessment (Common Core) with increased emphasis on child centered forums. Scheduled inter-visitations facilitated by the school coaches/administration will be arranged in order to model best practices (Danielson 1E, 3B, 3D) and effective teacher implementation of rigorous instruction. In February 2019 and in June 2019 an analysis of data culled from the Advance System will be reviewed to measure teacher practice. Monthly review of student data collection to ensure effective maintenance and progress monitoring throughout the year. Monthly benchmarking sheets (Alternate) and Common Core Binders/Work Samples Checklists (Standard) will be used to monitor progress. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers of Alternate and Standard students in grades K-8 Sept. 2018–Oct. 2019 School Coaches, Instructional Leads, Classroom Teachers Teachers who are effective/ Oct. 2018 – May 2019 Administration, School Coaches, Instructional Leads highly effective paired with developing/ineffective teachers Teachers of Alternate and Standardized Students in grades K-8 Oct. 2018-June 2019 Administration, Unit Coordinators. Coaches 5  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning in November, 2018 through June, 2019 the school will initiate "Parents as Partners" to support homework school-wide in all academic areas. The Parent Coordinator in conjunction with the school administration will conduct a workshop and parent connection component in order to facilitate parent involvement. Teachers will monitor weekly parent activity logs. We will continue to offer parents computer classes to facilitate their access to support programs. Class DOJO will also be implemented and shared with parents grades K-5 for standardized classrooms in order to keep them abreast of current class projects and curriculum updates. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Student Problem Solving Instructional Resources for hands-on projects Binders for data collection Coach Support Data Team Funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. After the second observational cycle (by February, 2019), the average of the alternate and standardized teachers (grades K-8) will rate a minimum of 3.35 in the targeted Danielson components (1E, 3B, 3D) in the Measure of Teacher Practice Summary Report in ADVANCE. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Monthly review of Advance components (1E, 3B, 3D) to monitor progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan if needed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Area of Strength  Results from the Analysis of OORS Level 1-5 incidents for the 2017-2018 school year show an overall decrease of 15% (2016-2017-39; 2017-2018-33).  Results from the 2017-2018 show no level 5 incidents for the year.  Results from the 2017-2018 School Survey demonstrate a significant increase in student and teachers positive perception of Classroom Behavior (2016-2017-69%; 2017-2018-77%); Guidance (2016-2017-82%; 2017-2018-92%); and Safety (2016-2017-82%; 2017-2018-89%. Priority of Need:  Results from the 2017-2018 OORS data demonstrates a 35% increase in level 4 behaviors.  Results from the 2017-2018 School Survey demonstrate student perception of Bullying Prevention at 58% (13% below the city average).  Decrease in Crisis Intervention Teacher (CIT) referral cases resulting in more on task student behaviors. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will demonstrate a 5% decrease from 2017-2018 academic year in level 4 weighted incidents as represented in the OORS summary report for standardized students in grades K-8. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Weekly examination of OORS report to monitor decrease of Level 4 incidents/infractions. Teacher and student surveys will be conducted to pair areas of interest to establish club offerings. Point sheets will be evaluated each week to determine if behavioral expectations are met. Expansion of Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS) modification program for Middle School (6-8) will be monitored on a weekly/monthly basis to determine student progress in attaining rewards (School Clubs). Implementation of Fletcher's Place mentoring program, where Middle School students tutor K-2 students in order to improve reading levels and socially appropriate behavior. Expansion of Class DOJO for K-5 standardized classes 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Standard Students October 2018 through June 2019 Administration, School Safety Committee, Pupil Personnel Committee All Standard Students Grades 3 through 8 Middle School Standard Students Standard students P75Q at main site October 2018 through June 2019 Administration, Classroom Teachers, Behavior Data Team Members Sept. 2018-June 2019 PBIS Committee Sept.2018- June 2019 Administration, Coaches, Classroom Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Student participation in club offerings is contingent upon meeting behavioral expectations. Parents are informed of student behavioral achievement and must review and sign daily point sheets. A parent support workshop will be scheduled in October 2018 by the Parent Coordinator, administration, and crisis staff and will outline parental role and club opportunities as well as supporting "Fletcher's Place" (a partnered reading program which supports student growth in academics and social/emotional needs). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8  Funding is required for Instructional resources and tangible rewards to support the various club offerings. Professional development for teachers in the implementation of "Fletcher's Place" Reading Buddy Program will be offered in October, 2018. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be a 2.5% decrease in the number of level 4 weighted incidents for standardized students occurrences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS, Class DOJO, School-wide Behavior Modification Program, Fletcher's Place Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of Strength:  The school successfully identifies areas of need via surveys, feedback, and teacher observations and provides corresponding Professional Development to designate and re-mediate areas for improvement. According to the School Quality Snapshot, 81% of teachers say that teachers at the school work together to design instruction.  The school successfully aligns instructional leads to Professional Development areas where their expertise is most beneficial. A list of teacher attended Professional Development trainings are maintained in a binder for the professional development team to use as a resource for in house trainings.  The school involves staff in the decision making process. This year the school surveyed teachers and paraprofessionals on Professional Development options. In the 2017-2018 Quality Review the school received a Well Developed rating on 1.4, Maintaining a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults. Areas of Need:  Teacher feedback substantiated a need for further support in the areas of: Behavior Management, Curriculum Implementation, Progress Monitoring, Using Assessments and Designing data driven instruction. Paraprofessional feedback indicated a need for further support in the areas of: Behavior Management, Classroom Structure, Classroom Instruction-Adapting Curriculum, IEP Monitoring, Assessments, and Safety. The 2017-2018 Quality Review Ratings for the school in 2.2 Assessment, 1.1 Curriculum, 1.2 Pedagogy were all Proficient, indicative that more work needs to be done in these specific areas.  Refinement of the process by which professional development trainings are selected through a Professional Development Team made up of all stakeholders within the school which allows for a balance of teacher’s choice and administrative requirements based on overall student and staff needs. Quality Review Indicator 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development were Proficient, leading us to improve our process and protocols in this area.  Refine Collegial Teams to increase collaborative activities with related service providers. Creating a structured consistent forum for teams to share needs to become a scheduled practice throughout the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 0  By June 2019, our Alternate Assessment Verbal Behavior classrooms will increase functional communication through the incorporation of JARS (Joint Action Routines) routines resulting in an overall 5% increase on ABLLS-R assessments sections (C-Receptive, F-Requesting). 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The administration and school staff will collaborate to create professional development, where the focus is to design meaningful instructional supports for the upcoming 2018-2019 school year. Student data will be reviewed by Collegial Teams and analyzed to adjust school professional development needs as well as instructional student targets throughout the year. The Professional Development team will design weekly trainings for professional development supports in addition to Chancellor’s Conference day’s in September, November and June. These trainings will target areas of functional communication supported through JARS routines, small group instruction, Thinking Maps for standardized students, behavior management in the classroom and progress monitoring. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Staff 9/2018 to 6/2019 School Administration Instructional Staff School Based Coaches Related Service Providers (Speech, OT, PT, ENL, Counselors) Facilitators Instructional Staff 9/2018 to 6/2019 School Administration Instructional Staff Related Service Providers (Speech, OT, PT, ENL, Counselors) School Based Coaches Professional Development Team The school is organized in distinctive educational pathways (ABLLS-R/Verbal Behavior, SANDI Program, Standardized students and ABLLS-R/Work Sampling System for Pre-Kindergarten programming. Based on those pathways, professional developments are implemented to impact teacher effectiveness through Danielson Rubric and student growth. Monthly progress monitoring opportunities will be provided in all classrooms in order to track progress and facilitate student Instructional Staff 9/2018 to 6/2019 School Administration School Based Coaches Lead Teachers 2 ability to develop skills needed to communicate in a functional and effective way. Revamped Collegial Teams will be created based on grade bands in addition to student’s functional levels and current communication systems in order to support and implement instruction using the JARS routine/ABLLS-R sections (Receptive-C; Requesting-F) once a month. Instructional Staff 9/2018 to 6/2019 School Administration Instructional Staff School Based Coaches Related Service Providers (Speech, OT, PT, ENL, Counselors) Facilitators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning in September, 2018, teachers will share with parents academic and skill based programs and practices during the designated parent engagement hours to enable them to support student academia and skill building in the home. Workshops will be provided in order for parents to gain an understanding of the JARS program and practices to support their children in the home using functional communication to have their wants and needs met in addition to generalization of all chosen instructional targets. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Based Option for schedule adjustment Instructional Materials Per Session Funding for Professional Development Team Professional Development Sessions will be scheduled on the school Professional Development Calendar. . Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 3  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, alternate assessment students in Verbal Behavior classrooms will demonstrate a minimum 2 1/2 % growth in ABLLS-R assessments in the Receptive (C) and Requesting (F) domains. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Baseline, midyear, and final growth progress monitoring-ABLLS-R Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of Strength:  Structure has been implemented for reconfigured day where the school can provide staff with quality targeted professional development on a weekly basis.  The principal supported the formation of school wide committees including the Pupil Personnel Team (PPT), Professional Development Committee, School Improvement Team (SIT), Data Team, School Leadership Team (SLT), Measure of Student Learning (MOSL) Committee, Consultation Committee, Language Proficiency, and Attendance. School Newsletters were provided to staff and parents to address the needs of the constituents and impact student growth.  Professional Growth was identified as Highly Effective in Advance. Areas of Need:    In order to keep up with the NYS teacher initiative the school will implement a program which will enable teachers to qualify hours for their certification by participating in weekly professional development sessions. Increased focus on reducing the amount of 1:1 paraprofessionals for students as a result of 2017-2018 data indicating that 24.1% (157) of our student population have them mandated on their IEP's. Movement from 6:1:1 to 8:1:1 placement for students needing Less Intensive Services (LIS). The school vision to move students along the continuum towards a less restrictive environment will be realized by this reduction. Focus on training of staff on behavior management techniques. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5  By June 2019, there will be a increase in Less Intensive Services (LIS) schoolwide based on reduction of 1:1 paraprofessionals by 5% (from 157 to 149) and movement from 6:1:1 to 8:1:1 educational pathways (ABLLS-R to SANDI) by 1% (from 20 classes to 18) demonstrating student growth academically, behaviorally, and through functional communication. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? TCIS training by certified trainer monthly for varied constituents. All Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration, TCIS certified trainer Progress Monitoring Tracking of students with FBA/BIP's. Discussion at PPT meetings monthly to target students for Less Intensive Services (LIS) in regard to paraprofessionals and student ratio. Create a schedule of monthly team meetings where all service providers and teacher share progress and next steps. Teachers All Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration, Counselors, PPT members Replacing work stations with work systems, as needed based on the functional needs of the students by pairing peer to peer collaboration through small group instruction. All Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Create a schedule for teacher inter-visitations and professional development trainings to model best practices. Create a forum for sharing 'meaningful takeaways' and document responses. All Teachers Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Administration, School based Coaches, Lead teachers, Related Service Providers. Administration, Coaches and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parallel Professional Development for Parents will be held monthly during Parent Association Meetings to demonstrate practices and inform instructional policy. Teacher/counselor/parent meetings to align parent support with less intensive decisions. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Technology to support initiative (Smartboards) Professional Development fees through CTLE (Continuing Teacher and Leader Education) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 7  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a increase in Less Intensive Services (LIS) schoolwide based on reduction of 1:1 paraprofessionals by 2 1/2% (from 157 to 153) and movement from 6:1:1 to 8:1:1 educational pathways (ABLLS-R to SANDI) by .5% (from 20 classes to 19) demonstrating student growth academically, behaviorally, and through functional communication. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SESIS, ATS rosters Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of Strength:  There was an overall 21% increase in attendance of parents in 2017-2018 (2301) at school meetings and  functions throughout the year as compared to 2016-2017 (1903). In response to the needs assessment survey of parents, the school continues the practice of movie night, implemented Cook Shop, English as a New Language (ENL) and computer classes. Areas of Need:  Based upon parent response at school based workshops during the 2017-2018 school year, the school will continue to afford opportunities for parental involvement in 2018-2019 in order to build a community where parents become more involved in the academic development of their children and prepare them for college and career readiness. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of middle school students will make a minimum of a 25% gain in vocationally aligned academic and social emotional student defined goals through home, school, and community collaborations as evidenced by the 4-step goal attainment protocol. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In September, 2018 the school will designate a Career Education Teacher who will implement an online vocational assessment ( O-Net Interest Profiler)to all students in grades 6 through 8 to identify student strengths and potential career paths. Students will pick one vocation based on the assesment and devise a long range action plan to help them achieve that vocational opportunity which will be shared with their parents. In October/November, 2018 a calendar of parent and student activities, workshops, and events that will be ongoing throughout the school year to support student college and career readiness will be scheduled. School Session times will be adjusted in order to have classroom teachers, coverage teachers, and related services providers available to support parent trainings including vocational trainings and related services supports. By November 2018, Students will identify a social emotional and academic yearly goal that supports their long term action plan. Four short term goals will be identified in order to progress monitor growth (Baseline, Midyear, and Final). All stakeholders will be involved in supporting goal achievement (school, home, and community). Development of an interactive website for parents to access all school information by individual sites. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents and all students in grades 6-8. September 2018 – May 2019 All parents and students in grades 6-8 and October-November 2018 Career Education Teacher, Administration, Parent Coordinator, Coaches Administration, Parent Coordinator, Career Education Teacher, Computer Technology, Related Service Providers, Teachers Parent Coordinator, Administration, School Coaches, Career Education Teacher November 2018-May 2019 Middle School Teachers All parents and students in grades 6-8, Middle School Teachers and Related Service Providers. Parents of all student populations By June 2019 Administration, Technology Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, Career Education Teacher If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 0  Community-based organizations will be identified and acquired to support transitional program beginning in September 2018. A vocational assessment will be reviewed by students and approved by parents and used as a basis for engagement activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session/per diem funding will be allocated to support the development of workshops/activities/college visits Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of middle school students will make a minimum of a 25% gain in vocationally aligned academic and social emotional student defined goals through home, school, and community collaborations as evidenced by the 4-step goal attainment protocol. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student academic and social emotional yearly goal with 4-step achievement protocol measurement for periodic progress monitoring (school made). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Functioning below level 3 on standardized exam in ELA Teacher observation of student overall class performance Mathematics Functioning below level 3 on standardized exam Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) SRA Kits Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group/one to one Daily during the school day Great Leaps ELA Smile Words Their Way Thinking Maps Unique Learning Systems Reading A-Z Ed Performance Series Fletcher's Place I-Lit (On-line) Think Central Math Steps Small group/one to one Daily during the school day One to one/Individual Math Dashboard CMP3 ST Math Thinking Maps Unique Learning Systems 2  Science Students (grades K-8) who function significantly below grade levelwill be identified for academic Intervention services in science. Student performance will be assessed through teacher observation, classroom assessment results, and state assessments (grades 4 and 8). Social Studies Students (grades K-8) who function significantly below grade levelwill be identified for academic Intervention services in social studies Student performance will be assessed through teacher observation, and classroom assessment results). Inability of students due to problematic behaviors to give full focus to task Absences exceeding 10% At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Touchmath BrainPop Small group/one to one Unique Learning Systems Thinking Maps Daily during the school day BrainPop Small group/one to one Daily during the school day Unique Learning Systems Thinking Maps Counseling: Strategies for students to improve on-task duration Attendance Procedures: Strategy to minimize student absences through classroom and attendance teachers Counseling Sessions individual/small group Attendance Teacher and Classroom Teacher initiate home contacts through telephone or home visits During the school day Daily during the school day During the school day, as needed 3  tracking of weekly student attendance Parent/Community Outreach Services provided as per counseling schedule Crisis Intervention provided as needed to at risk students One to one with crisis intervention staff IEP mandated counseling One to one/small group 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 0 Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 7  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 8  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Public School 75 Queens, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, College and Career Readiness Initiatives, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Public School 75 Queens will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 0  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 1  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), College and Career Readiness Initiatives, and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Public School 75 Queens, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 3  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences, Parent Training workshops, College visits with students. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 4  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P75Q presently services 570 students. 172 (30%) are English Language Learners (ELLs). 76% of the ELLs are in alternate assessments and 24% are standardized. Our ELL population includes students from grades K-8 who are between the ages of 5 and 12 years old. The school services students with autism, intellectual disability, and emotional disturbance (ED). The languages spoken in our students’ households include Spanish, Bengali, Urdu, Cantonese, Mandarin, Hindi, Punjabi, Arabic, Albanian, Portuguese, Japanese, Russian and Haitian Creole. Instructional methodologies that are used with our ELLs include The Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA), Total Physical Response (TPR) and the Language Experience Approach (LEA). We also use graphic organizers and Thinking Maps to facilitate comprehension and organization for our students. Technology is incorporated into lessons to provide additional support. Instructional materials promote high interest and are relevant to students’ backgrounds, academic needs and strengths are also used to support instruction. The ENL and classroom teachers plan collaboratively to design lessons that address the different levels of language proficiency as well as the four modalities (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) in English. The students participating in the program scored at the Entering and Emerging levels on the 2018 New York State English as A Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) and therefore will benefit from supplemental literacy instruction in English. Our Title III program (Literacy through Culture) will be held at the main site, twice a week on Wednesday and Thursdays for two hours each day (2:25pm to 4:25pm) over a 20 week period beginning on October 2018. The program will service 24 ELLs in 6:1:1, 8:1:1 and 12:1:1 class ratios in grades 4-8. Most of the students participating in the program also participate in CHAMPS. Therefore, The ENL teacher and the Special Education teacher will service four groups of six students each in two one hour sessions each day. The program will be conducted in English using ENL methodologies by one New York State certified ENL teacher and one Special Education teacher. There will be three paraprofessionals (two classroom and one multilingual fluent in Bengali, Urdu, Hindi and Punjabi). The multilingual paraprofessional will divide her time between the different groups in order to provide support as needed. The program will be supervised by one administrator whose salary will be paid by another after after school program. The Title III program is a continuation of our school's curriculum, and will help students build skills in English in the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. The Common Core Learning Standards, New Language Arts Progressions and ELA extensions in grades 4-8 will guide instruction. Students will have ample opportunities to engage in differentiated activities that will foster receptive and expressive language skills. In order to achieve our goal of improving student performance, teachers will utilize read alouds, visual supports, Total Physical Response (TPR), small group instruction and whole group instruction. ELLs with severe cognitive and developmental disabilities have difficulty generalizing skills learned and applying them in different situations in a variety of settings. P75Q plans to provide a means for ELL students to build and generalize their listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English for social interaction. The Title III after-school program will utilize the Unique Learning System to foster literacy development. “The Unique Learning System” suggests that reading instruction for students with 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information significant disabilities follow a unit approach, which integrates many subjects into a theme. (Browder 2006) Research for students with mild disabilities has shown improved performance with a unit approach (Englert, Raphael & marriage, 1994; Mastropierie and Scruggs, 1994). Elements of an inclusive unit design include: 1. A central unit issue, 2. an opening motivator, 3. lessons that are linked to the theme, 4. source varied modes of student expression (Onsosko & Jorgensen 1998). This format is also conducive to the varied needs of students with significant disabilities. Another program we will be using is Reading A-Z (ENL edition). This programs pays close attention to the National Panel's recommendations and other research findings when developing its reading resources. The student and teacher resources on the reading A-Z web site have been developed to reflect the instructional practices and reading strategies that are best supported by research findings from a wide variety of sources. The resources also correspond to the finding of the Put reading First Federal initiative. the results are organized around five key areas of reading instruction-phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension. The Unique Learning program and Reading A-Z ENL edition will be purchased using Title III funds. Other supplies purchased to enhance the program's learning activities will include, glue, markers, Velcro, notebooks, coloring pencils, crayons, markers and wipes. The ESL professional handwriting book #1 will be used with students who need to improve their handwriting and the picture dictionaries are for those students who are experiencing difficulties understanding the meaning of unfamiliar vocabulary words in English. The headset with microphone will allow for quiet listening time while using their i-Pads and will motivate students to provide verbal explanations of what they have listened to. In addition, the CD player and the speaker will be used for playing music and other audio content pertaining to the different cultures being studied. The program will also use multicultural activities to allow students to learn about different countries and cultures. Sample activities will include: retelling a story by sequencing the main events using picture cards with words, creating flip books with pictures and labels to show at least 4 important events from a given story, drawing conclusions and inferences, identifying facts and opinions ( aligned with New York State Alternate Assessment ELA extensions 11308 Grade 5 Reading), and summarizing stories read aloud using different thinking maps to help with organization and writing skills. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Professional Development (PD) portion of the Title III after school program will be held at the main site and consist of three one hour Friday sessions from 2:25pm to 3:25pm. They will take place on the first, tenth and twentieth weeks of the program. One of the ENL teachers will conduct all three sessions and cover ENL methodologies and best practices for literacy development and the instruction of ELLs. Participating staff will be the other ENL teacher (will receive the trainee rate) and the three paraprofessionals. The topic of the first session will be assessment. It will consist of demonstration and utilization of the assessment tools to be used to determine the ELL student’s present level of performance with regard to receptive and expressive language. The second session will cover training on how to incorporate ENL 8  Part C: Professional Development methodologies and strategies into the existing curriculum. The third will be used to analyze/discuss the overall success of the program as related to students' IEP goals and language acquisition needs. Results will be used to design themes for future Title III programs. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Involvement is paramount to the success of our endeavor. “To promote a healthy self-esteem of each and every child, early childhood education programs must be thoughtfully designed to serve both parents and children for those who speak a language other than English at home (Helen Nissany, 1961).” “Research has indicated that parental involvement is correlated with increased academic performance, especially in schools with a high percentage of culturally and linguistically diverse populations (Henderson and Marburger, 1987).” The parent component of the Title III supplemental program will consist of four separate parent engagement workshops to take place on Tuesdays from 3:45 p.m. to 5:45 p.m. The first one will take place on the first week of the instructional program, and the last three will be held every five weeks after that. The two certified ENL teachers will conduct the workshops. The workshops will serve as an informational meeting where the ENL teachers explain the instructional program, its components and benefits to the students and parents. Parents will be given strategies and tips on how to support and increase their students’ learning at home. Information regarding the Title III Program will be provided via letters sent home, telephone calls and parent meetings. All letters will be translated into the parents’ home languages and interpreters will be available for telephone conversations and parent meetings. The Department of Education’s Language Translation and Interpretation Unit will be used as needed. in order to foster communication and parental participation in school activities by parents of diverse cultural backgrounds, parents will be provided with multiple opportunities to express concerns and have their questions answered. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $19,586.98  Per session  Per diem Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Direct instruction: 1 ENL teacher -1 Special Education teacher X 2 days per week X 2 hrs per day X 20 weeks @ $60.65 = $9,704.00 9  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 3 paraprofessionals X 2 days per week X 2 hrs per day X 20 weeks @ 34.73= $8,335.20 Professional Development: 1 ENL teacher trainer X 3 sessions X 1 hr @ $60.65= $181.95 1 Special Education teacher trainee x 3 sessions x 1hr. @ $27.62 = $82.86 3 paraprofessionals x 3 sessions X 1 hr @ $34.73 =$312.27 Parent Involvement: 2 teachers trainers X 4 sessions X 2 hr @ $60.65 =$970.40 0 Miscellaneous instructional supplies: (notebook paper, pencils, crayons colored markers, glue sticks Velcro, notebooks, chart paper, construction paper, folders, scissors, cleaning wipes, 12 project display boards) = $331.57 Professional ESL Handwriting Book #1: 12 @ $10.19 each = $122.28 Bilingual Picture Dictionaries: 11 @ $18.15 each = $199.65 AVID On Ear Headset with Microphone: 5 @ 26.83 each = $134.15 Boombox-CD (1) = $153.55 Purchased services  High quality staff $0 $1,026.20 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. 0 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Voombox classroom speaker =$85.00 Unique - 2 Licenses @ $502.95 each = $1,005.90 Reading A-Z ELL Edition - 2 licenses @ $60.00 each = $120.00 Refreshment for parents = $98.92 Educational Software (Object Code 199) $1,125.90 Travel Other TOTAL $0 $98.92 $21838 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name Robert E. Peary Borough Queens School Number 075 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal James Thorbs Coach Joy Mulvey ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher L. Ortiz, L. Amari, L. Perez Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Ketler Louissaint Assistant Principal Joan Gelin Coach Theresa Falivene School Counselor Joanna Grullon-Beckles Parent Luz Soria Parent Coordinator Rosa Ramos Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 5 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 558 2 Total number of ELLs 179 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 32.08%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools our school uses to assess the early literacy skills of our ells are Fountas and Pinnell, FAST, SANDI, ABLLS-R and Scantron. These assessments are designed to help students reach educational standards. The results help teachers clearly define measurable goals, pinpoint objectives that need to be reviewed and assess their needs to modify instruction. Other forms of assessment, such as checklists, are also used. These checklists include the following: data that appraises the student’s knowledge of numbers, letters, colors, basic commands, etc., i.e. FAST, reading comprehension, writing skills as well as an inventory of English structures used by the teacher to develop contextualized activities. Data-folios that contain samples of student work will be used to monitor students’ progress over a period of time. We also take in consideration the results from the NYSESLAT to help students develop skills in the most deficient area(s) such as writing. In addition, at the end of each lesson, students are given an "exit slip" to monitor students understanding of the lesson being delivered. This data is then transferred to a weekly data collection sheet so that teachers can evaluate students progress and deficiency. 3  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The school has formative and summative assessments to guide instruction for our ells. Summative assessment is used to evaluate student learning at the of an instructional unit, e.g., teachers made materials. Formative assessment is to monitor student learning to provide ongoing feedback that can be used by teachers to improve their teaching and by students to improve their learning. It includes results from SANDI, FAST, ABLLS, NYSESLAT and ECLAS. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At the end of the school year, ELL staff review the materials used with ells to see what is showing progress. Then LAP team meets with administrators to discuss what materials are working and to plan for future materials, if necessary. Additionally, we analyze data taken from SANDI, NYSAA and NYSESLAT to monitor student progress. At the present time, materials and programs used for our ells are meeting their needs and parent request of programs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Summative data is used to support students' academic and social skills to establish and maintain the following components within the classroom. When data is reviewed and information is analyzed, students instruction is determined. We do that at collegial meetings held twice a month at the main site and at P75Q@P48Q. During these meetings, we discuss students progress and we also look at those students that are making little or no progress. Having these collegial meetings help us to plan appropriate lessons for our kids and to modify or change program being used. At this point, the team (ENL teachers) have the responsibility of deciding which intervention(s), whether available or pre-identified or individualized intervention would be most appropriate for supporting the student. A deep review of student data and assessment results will guide this decision. To address intervention, the team will create a specific plan that include progress monitoring, growth expectations, and timelines to evaluate progress. Professional learning support will be in plan to ensure and monitor that the interventions are implemented effectively. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The ENL teachers work closely with classroom teachers who use SANDI in order to guide the instruction in their classrooms. The ENL teachers work with their students with their SANDI goals in mind. Within the RtI framework, data is analyzed and instruction is designed to target areas in need. We also have teachers who use ABLLS to support instructions. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The results of 2016 NYSESLAT show that the focus for most of our students needs to be reading and writing. Data application and analysis of class profiles indicate that the majority of our ells are at the entering level of English proficiency. The school also take in consideration the results from SANDI, FAST AND NYSAA to evaluate and monitor students progress. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to disseminate these findings, the ENL department analyzes data obtained from NYSESLAT and share this information with all teachers and the administration. The information is disseminated though PDs held by ENL teachers during the extended days, collaboration with classroom teachers during integrated lessons, and working individually with teachers during lesson preparation. Part IV: ELL Programming 4  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction is delivered in English using ENL methodologies in collaboration with classroom teachers using data from various assessment. The school follows the Integrated and Stand Alone ENL methods of instruction. Students are instructed in heterogeneous groups according to their continuum classification, age range and proficiency level. All students receiving ENL services are either at the Entering, Emerging, Transitional, Commanding, and Expanding Level of Proficiency. Students are grouped in self contained classes with 6:1:1, 8:1:1, 12:1:1 student to staff ratios according to their IEP. Additionally we have ells in inclusion programs who sit in general education classrooms with the support of a special education teacher and a paraprofessional. They also receive ENL services following the criteria described above. b. TBE program. If applicable. Our school does not offer a TBE program at this time c. DL program. If applicable. Our school does not offer a DL program at this time 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ells are scattered across the classroom settings of 6:1:1, 8:1:1 and 12:1:1 and inclusion throughout different sites. ENL teachers make every effort to ensure that ells receive the total number of units of ENL required by CR Part 154 based on their grade and proficiency levels. Due to the number of sites and shortage of ENL teachers that our organization has at the present time, we are unable to provide the total number of units required by CR-154. Students receive both integrated and stand alone ENL service by one of our NYS certified ENL teachers. ELA is provided by NYS special education certified classroom teachers. We do not have a TBE program, therefore do not provide HLA. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teachers together with the classroom teachers plan collaboratively in the development of lesson plans for the levels of language proficiency and the skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing. Activities are differentiated based on students' proficiency level. The use of technology, music and visual cues are all incorporated to help students succeed. Content area instruction uses ENL methodologies. Classroom teachers adapt curriculum in order to meet the needs of students with severe disabilities. All attempts in planning will be made to formulate a Bilingual class whenever possible and appropriate. The certified ENL teachers utilize an Integrated ENL and Stand Alone model of instruction and work together with the classroom teachers to plan collaboratively in the development of lesson plans for the level of language proficiency and the skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing. During planning, ENL teachers ensure that New Language Arts Progressions are followed. Students are supported throughout the day via an Academic Intervention Services (AIS) program, Instructional Technology, Visual Arts Enrichment, and with differentiated instruction and tutoring with emphasis on specific skills in reading and writing. Language support may include explicit vocabulary instruction (i.e. pre-teaching and contextualizing vocabulary) and scaffolding writing activities. The use of technology is included to give students additional instructional support. Multi-sensory and multi-cultural materials are infused throughout all aspects of instruction. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 5  The first step we make is to determine the ells literacy backgrounds in their home language. Teachers use predictability logs to make these assessments. They can also use non-traditional assessments, such as checklists and observations, to determine ells' literacy strengths and needs. Knowledge of ways to assess ells literacy development accurately can help classroom teachers determine instructional lessons and interventions so that all students make real progress towards literacy. At this time P75Q does not have a bilingual classroom; however, bilingual related service providers and alternate placement paraprofessionals assist student and, informally, do assessment to measure students' academic skills in their home language. Alternate placement paraprofessionals work close with the teachers to measure academic and behavior progress of ells. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE: P75Q’s plan will encourage and guide students both academically and socially, supporting their linguistic and cultural appreciation. In addition, it will integrate students’ native language as a tool to support strong ELA acquisition. Services available for any newcomer or SIFE students include tutoring, community awareness activities, support of home language, and nurturing environment to facilitate language production, and technology. Students will be placed into our program based on IEP mandates and will receive all services specified with IEP. Students will be integrated into classroom settings based continuum mandates for class size and age as per NYS regulations. Instruction will be differentiated both inside of the class setting and within the framework of ENL instruction. For newcomer ells, we utilize strategies such as Total Physical Response and small-group instruction. With developing ells, we use a great deal of technology to support literacy development. Long term ELLs will continue to be supported through the communication and technology components of their educational programs. Long term ells are entitled to all AIS services. We currently have one former ELL and he is receiving 90 minutes of integrated ENL service. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL teachers use many instructional strategies and grade level materials to provide our students with access to academic content area and to accelerate English language development. Some of the strategies include, modeling, differentiation of instruction, thematic teaching, visual tools, repetition, and the use of high thinking techniques such as comparing and contrast. In addition, ENL teachers have been trained on Thinking Maps which help students organize ideas for their writing. In order to better support our English Language Learners to achieve their highest potential and get the most out of their learning experience, the ENL teachers combine their materials with the classroom teachers materials when planning rigorous instruction that includes the common core standards. We use all different strategies to help students achieve their maximum in all 4 modalities. Materials used to help our ells include, the Unique Learning System Program for reading and writing, and grade level books (Reading A-Z) which we modify to our students level of reading proficiency. Our school uses the Unique Learning System program to work with our ells. It is a web based program with a full curriculum that is aligned with common core standards. There is a curriculum across 3 grade levels, early childhood, elementary, middle school, and intermediate that each ENL teacher in our school uses according to the grades of their students. This program is used specifically for our alternate assessment population. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All students in P75Q are categorized as special need students. Our students are placed in the least restrictive environment based on IEP mandates. Because of this, our students have special instructional concerns for both ELL and a diagnosed disability. The schools utilizes itinerant ENL teachers servicing students throughout 8 sites locations in the school organization. Students are given ENL services as a part of their special placement due to their disabilities. Curriculum is enhanced with ENL programs designed to improve students second language skills. Students are grouped by functional abilities (proficiency levels) to maximize instructional focuses. Teachers schedules are adapted to maximize instructional time while servicing 182 students over 8 sites. Due to the nature of the handicapping conditions, our students are required to be in a self-contained classroom in 6  the least restrictive environment possible. The only time our non-inclusion, ELL students from PS 239, 254, and 276 would be spending time with their non-disabled peers during mealtimes (breakfast and lunch) and dismissal. Alternate placement para's work with our bilingual Ell's and stay with them throughout the day. In addition, they will receive ENL instruction by Stand Alone and Integrated ENL method. Our inclusion students from PS. 239, PS 88, and IS 93 spend the day in the classroom with their non-disabled peers. The ENL teacher will use Stand Alone ENL model and work in groups or with individual students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Content Area Instruction: Math, Social Studies and Science are taught by special education classroom teachers in English. Supplemental materials are utilized in the child's home language to promote learning and understanding of difficult concepts. Language development and subject area teaching/learning are critical to the success of ells. P75Q practices to support our ells Cognitive Academic Proficiency include: an emphasis on data-driven instruction, a well-trained staff to address the unique needs of Ell students, and consistent language support services across all grade levels as well as a meaningful curriculum aligned with state standards and assessment. Staff are supported by sustained job embedded professional development. ells are grouped by level of English language acquisition, (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding levels), to facilitate instruction. Content Area Instruction follows NYS Common Core Standards. Through the Integrated ENL model, the ENL teachers team with the classroom staff to focus on oral and written language development in English. Positive reinforcement, as well as behavior management techniques is applied through a functional communication approach to learning, via Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA). All subject areas are taught in English, through ENL methodologies by special education teachers who have completed the mandated 10 hours of Jose P. ENL training. Scaffolding techniques are used in Content Area Instruction to elaborate and expand on students’ language. Mayer-Johnson symbols are also used on picture boards. Students in Alternate Placement are provided with home language support from a paraprofessional who speaks the student’s home language, as well as English. P. 75Q has been using an ENL Program, which provides students with the opportunity to learn Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP) that focuses on language necessary for academic success in the content areas. Example: The classroom environment, in which ENL is taught through mathematics content, has been carefully structured so that second language acquisition can occur. Instructional activities promote second language development through a natural process that focuses not on language, but on communicating the concepts and applications of mathematics. Lessons teaching new concepts in mathematics focus on the use of manipulative, graphics and concrete materials to clarify and reinforce language meanings through mathematics. Instructional activities build on students’ real-life experiences as well as prior knowledge. The use of technology is incorporated into ENL and content area instruction to provide students with additional support. Students who score Commanding on the NYSESLAT are placed in a monolingual classroom and are supported with Integrated ENL instruction by the ENL teacher for the first two years for 90 min. per week. Test accommodations for former ells include: time extensions, separate locations and/or small group administration and read aloud English Language Arts: Literacy instruction follows the NYS Common Core Standards, NYC Balanced Literacy Program, and Teachers College workshop model which is supported by classroom libraries including an assortment of multicultural books and the use of technology. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue using Unique Learning System and Reading A-Z to assist us in instruction as it has been beneficial for our students. Also, there is a bilingual component and the stories are at an appropriate level for our struggling readers and are also of high-interest. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? P75Q does not have a bilingual program at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our school makes every effort to provide the best possible experience for our students. School offers an orientation for prospective and incoming students. Parents are presented with the spectrum of services we offer. This includes all 7  instructional and related services and other support services that compliment students' well being and success at school. Students are supported by all staff and are integrated to all the programs available in the school including after-school programs. All ells are invited to participate in our Title III program. This supplemental instructional program provides much needed additional services to our students as they have ample opportunity to engage in activities including hands-on, short stories read aloud, and literacy through the use of computers. 75Q plans to provide a means for all ells students to build and generalize their listening, speaking, reading and writing skills in English for social interaction. ells are also invited to participate in CHAMPS after-school program, as well as an after-school culinary program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. • Big Books – an assortment of in both Spanish and English • Simple Addition Instant Learning Center • Foam Dice (for practicing math operations, probability and place value) • Linking Cubes (to build skills in basic math operations, measurement and graphing. • Hardwood Pattern Blocks • PECS • Sight-Word Readers – Level 1-3 • Mayer-Johnson Symbols • Edmark Reading Program • “Avenues” Vocabulary Builders set – Hampton Brown • “Smart Talk” Interactive language Acquisition Station • 10 Minutes to Better Reading – CD plus book set . .LinguiSystem: Picture Stories and Language Activities Things I can Say and Do – Autism/PDD Functional Vocabulary Kit Unique Learning System . Reading A-Z 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Use of Home Language: An array of culturally relevant and interesting materials on a variety of levels is used to encourage students to maintain and value their home language and culture. Thus, helping students to develop a sense of pride, as well as helping students build skills and strategies that will transfer into English. Although we do not have a TBE or DL program, home language support is provided by alternate placement paraprofessionals, where applicable. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. English Language Learners receive required services and resources a per their IEP. Required related services include PT, OT, Speech, counseling, Alternate Placement paraprofessional as well as crisis and health paraprofessionals. ELLs are continuously evaluated to ensure that the level of support service they are receiving is appropriate for their needs. As ells advance and acquire more skills in whatever area they are getting support in, the services decrease. For instance, there are ells who required speech therapy 2X30X1, but as they develop their language skills, mandates are reduced to 2X30X3 and the same thing happen in other areas. Additionally, materials (both purchased and teacher-made) are differentiated and adapted to be age-appropriate, despite instances when students' cognitive abilities do not closely correspond with their age level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Staff members who work in shared locations have their materials in separate locations. They are able to provide instruction without any impediment. In the inclusion sites, general education teachers, the special education teachers and ENL teachers work in conjunction to deliver instruction. The general education teacher and the ENL teacher does the following: share materials, do common planning to differentiate instruction and share vision and goals. we also discuss social interaction in the classroom to help students adapt to their new setting. 8  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). P75Q ensures that all ells feel welcome and comfortable in their new environment. We believe that it is very important to have an orientation with the ells and their parents. Parents of ells can provide vital information that ENL teachers as well as classroom teachers, and content areas teachers can use to better serve them. During the orientation, ells get to meet some of the staff members that will be working with them and get familiar with the school building. Throughout the year, ells continue being involved in different activities to help them succeed and thus achieve their goals. Some of the activities include, games, group meetings, trips, and after school program. Some of the staff members involved include counselors, parent coordinator, classroom and ENL teachers and related service providers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time, P75Q is offering Spanish to all of our middle school children. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? P75Q does not offer dual language program at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? On-going professional development is necessary to consistently instruct staff on using ENL strategies and methodologies as well as the implication of the Language Allocation Policy. Every Monday we have an extended day. This extra time is used for the ELL department to meet, collaborate, discuss best practices and learn from each other. As teachers attend professional development workshops, they will turnkey what they have learned to the other ENL teachers during this time. Over the course of the school year, ENl teachers attend many PDs; 50% of those PDs must be ENL related topics. Some of the topics that we plan to cover are: collaborative team-teaching, supporting language development through content instruction, preparing students for the NYSESLAT, incorporating technology into instruction. We also continue attending the Thinking Maps PD which is offered twice a month on Mondays. All staff members are encouraged to attend professional development workshops provided by the District 75 Office of English Language Learners as well as DELLSS. ENL teachers subscribe to the DELLSS weekly and are made aware of PD offerings. All staff assigned to ELL students receive their mandated professional development (15%) through web-casting and by attending professional development given the District 75 Office of English Language Learners and DELLSS. Workshops provided by these two entities incorporate CCLS-aligned instruction, such as teaching core vocabulary and questioning techniques. Resources and skills that are gained from participation in these workshops will be turnkeys during the ELL department's weekly meetings. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 9  School ensures that all staff working with our ells receive 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers working with ells and 50% for our English as New language teachers. Teachers attend District 75 City-wide ELL workshops and meetings. They also maintain contact with the District 75 ELL coaches and director regarding issues of compliance and instruction. During the 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 school year P. 75Q’s Professional development plan includes issues pertaining to the instruction of ells, such as language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. P. 75Q teachers and paraprofessionals who serve ells are supported through coaching services and are encouraged to attend district, city and state wide professional development focusing on the education of ells such as: Jose P. All teachers participate in mandated Jose P. ENL training. All documents regarding Jose P Compliance are maintained with the school (office files and ELL Compliance Binder). The PD's help teachers understand how ells learn and what different strategies they can use to support their academic growth in different subject areas. During the PD's, we talk to teachers about the benefits of using graphic organizers to help ells fully participate in reading and writing discussion and activities during lessons. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to Parent/Teacher conference, IEP meetings and orientations, school ensures that ENL teachers meet with ELL parents at least once a year to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Parents are provided with interpreters in their home language. All records pertaining to the annual individual meetings with ELL parents are kept in a binder in the main office. Also, each ENL teacher keeps a binder for their students. Information is also kept in ATS (iLog). Through the school’s Parent Coordinator and the ENL teachers, P.75Q will offer parents of ells ongoing information in their home language. Ample opportunity and time will be provided to convey concerns in order to promote communication with and participation by parents from different cultural backgrounds through orientations, IEP meetings, Parent Teacher conferences, Parent Association Meetings, and workshops. Workshops will be provided to encourage effective parental participation in school activities, home activities, and to support the acquisition of literacy skills, learning assessments, standards and achievement of goals. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P75Q ensures that ELL parents are provided with workshops that are informative and important to them. Parents are given ample opportunities to express their concern and talk about topics they would like to learn more about. The Parent Coordinator surveys the parents' needs and sees that the activities planned are aligned with the findings. Some of the programs that are currently being offered include Get Ready To Learn (GRTL), computer and ESL classes, cook shop, student of the month, parents support groups supervised by one of our counselors, etc. There is a monthly meeting on the 3rd Wednesday of each month where the Parent Coordinator invites different guests speakers and entities to offer parents information on different topics of interest and resources to better help their children at home. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 0  1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, James Thorbs, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Robert E. Peary School DBN: 75Q75 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) James Thorbs Title Principal Christine Breyer Assistant Principal Rosie Ramos Luis D. Ortiz Luz Soria Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Laura Amari (ENL) Teacher/Subject Area Leonelda Perez (ENL) Teacher/Subject Area Joy Mulvey Theresa Falivene Coach Coach Joanna Beckles School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75Q075 School Name: Robert E. Peary Superintendent: Ketler Louissai The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Ramos N/A N/A N/A Parent Coordinator N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A N/A N/A Rosa N/A N/A N/A * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The school determines the primary language spoken by each parent by reviewing Part 3 of the student home language survey forms, emergency cards and ATS reports. Language needs are compiled and maintained by the parent coordinator and the ENL teacher who work closely together to ensure that translation/interpretation needs of parents are met. P75Q hires staff members who are bilingual specifically in the area of parent outreach and who are utilized as parent translations and assist in interpretation at all parent meetings. We also use the over the phone service that offers translation and interpretation in many languages. 4  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The parents' preferred languages for both written and oral communication include: English Spanish Arabic Bengali Chinese Urdu Korean Albanian Punjabi Mandarin Nepali Polish Japanese Cantonese Haitian Creole Hebrew 360 107 3 12 26 2 1 2 0 0 1 1 0 0 4 1 N/A N/A 68.7% 20.42% 0.57% 1.39% 3% 0.38% 0.19% 0.38% 0% 0% 0.19% 0.19% 0% 0% 0.46% 0.12% N/A% 356 112 3 11 19 2 1 2 0 5 1 1 0 3 3 1 N/A 67.94% 21.37% 0.57% 1.27% 2.19% 0.38% 0.19% 0.38% 0% 0.95% 0.19% 0.19% 0% 0.35% 0.35% 0.12% N/A% 5  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A% N/A% N/A N/A N/A% N/A% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A at this time. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. P75Q routinely translates and sends out written correspondences to parents in all preferred languages provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. staff are utilized to provide interpretation and translation in other languages. The ENL teacher (Luis Ortiz) in conjunction with the Parent Coordinator (Rosie Ramos) translate school letters and flyers in Spanish. Translated documents are distributed to parents a week or two prior to the events. Translated documents include: calendars parent-teacher conferences announcements (fall and spring), after-school program information (fall) Families Monthly March and November New York State testing dates (spring), October/November holidays and school closing announcements 6  April/May letters from the school leadership and other school events such as PTA announcements, parents' workshops, school carnival, movie night, etc. December, February April, etc. As needed N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? The school uses staff who speak parents' home languages. During IEP meetings teachers and psychology use staff who speak parents' home language. In addition, paraprofessionals are hired to provided translation services during parent-teacher conference in the parents' home language. Formal face to face meetings our school has during the year include: IEP meetings Parent-Teacher Conferences School orientation for new parents once a year per student) March & November October of each school year 7  Informal interactions include: attendance teacher phone calls to parents, guidance counselors to discuss students' progress and behavior. As needed N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Limited-English-proficient (LEP) parents are entitled to meaningful communication in a language they can understand, such as through translated materials or a language interpreter, and to adequate notice of information about any program, service, or activity that is called to the attention of non-LEP parents.” In the event of a school emergency, School utilizes bilingual staff to call parents in their home language. A list of LEP parents is kept in the ENL office by Luis Ortiz, the Parent Coordinator and the office staff so that they can have quick access in case of an emergency. Also, the ENL teacher/Parent Coordinator keep a list of staff and the language they speak. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Prior to the commencement of classes, all staff are informed of Chancellor's Regulation A-663. This is done during the first day orientation held at the main site. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P75Q will comply with Chancellor's Regulations A683 by ensuring that parent home language needs are ascertained through the pupil accounting secretary and shared with the parent coordinator, ENL teacher, and school staff. Parents are notified in their home language of the "Bill of Parental Rights and Responsibilities." Postings are prominently displayed at the entrance to the school notifying parents of language assistance available in the school. Written correspondence is in the parent home language. Interpretation services via staff member or over the telephone is available for parent conferences, parents engagement and PTA meetings. 8  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school obtains feedback from parents using Parents' Survey and by talking to them in person after the event. The Parent Coordinator will disseminate survey to parents in their home language following workshops. In addition, surveys will be sent home to parents annually to obtain feedback regarding previous and future workshops. 9 
