 School Name: 30Q078 P.S. 078 Principal: LOUIS PAVONE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 30Q078 PS/IS 78Q 343000010078 PreK-8 48-09 Center Boulevard LIC, NY 11109 718-392-5402 Phone Number: 718-392-5434 Fax: Louis Pavone lpavone@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Louis Pavone AnnawaNaing Genevieve Bernier Gerry Gianutsos Non title I School N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 30 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dr. Philip A. Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North LIC, NY PCompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 1-718-391-8323 Phone Number: 718-391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   North Queens Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North LIC, NY LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 1-718-392-5402 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Louis Pavone AnnawaNaing Genevieve Bernier Carmen Gibson Gerry Gianutsos Erin Morrissey Nancy Mendez-Shiu *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dennis Wysocki Andre Galan AnneMarieNasello Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS/IS 78Q believes in “Educating the Whole Child” and its mission is to provide a global education that enhances student achievement through a focus on higher-order thinking skills, problem-solving strategies, and teamwork, while providing highly enriched art programs that are integrated into our literacy program and throughout the core curriculum   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/IS 78Q is an elementary-intermediate school with 710 students from pre-kindergarten through grade 8. The school population comprises 4% Black, 31% Hispanic, 42% White, 18% Asian students, and 5% other students. The student body includes 7% English language learners and 11% special education students. Boys account for 49% of the students enrolled and girls account for 51%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 94.8%. . At P.S./I.S. 78Q we provide an educational setting where children will discover their own uniqueness, personal worth, and academic potential. Students are encouraged to work cooperatively in small groups, share whole class instruction, and receive personalized direct teaching. Opportunities for students, parents and staff to be “risk-takers” in the learning process will have a positive impact on our learning community as they become lifelong learners and responsible citizens of the 21 st century. This is a school that has a culture of success, professionalism and high expectations. Those expectations are embedded in our practice and embedded in our culture. The practice of good citizenship, which includes being courteous, well mannered, friendly and respectful can be seen throughout the school building. The school is a safe, welcoming, nurturing environment, for students, staff and parents. It is a place where expectations are constantly reinforced through words and practice. Each morning we share an inspirational positive Morning Message read by students in both buildings that provide students with words to reflect on to build character by encouraging ethical thinking, to build self-esteem by motivating students to do their personal best, and to build community by inspiring students to contribute to the world around them while honoring the diversity that makes our country great. The students participate in the "Value of the Month" program and work towards achieving Student of the Month for that value. We are proud to present to our families quality partnerships with outside organizations such as: Metropolitan Museum of Art, Seaport Museum, Department of Environmental Protection, NYS Parks and Recreation, Lincoln Center Education, Studio In a School, St. John’s University, Serious Fun and Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation (SASF). We encourage parents to participate in our School Wide Enrichment Program (SEM) as real life professionals to work with our students. SEM provides students a learning experience that is aligned to their interests and learning styles. They learn about careers that are of interest to them and are provided with experiences and projects from members of the community in the field. Parents are invited to our community fair to learn from their children. Establishing partnerships with families is a top priority for all members of the P.S./I.S. 78Q community. We open up every school year by continuing the tradition of inviting our student’s families into the classrooms to discuss the curriculum and expectations. This year we have had the opportunity to invite parents to weekly meetings to discuss individual student’s strengths, weaknesses and next steps. Teams of teachers come together to share assessments and discuss a path for progress with individual families. To support an understanding of the on-going units being implemented in the classrooms, teacher teams develop plans and work to inform parents of the expectations of the units and how they can support their child at home. We send home progress reports in October, report cards in November, January and March and Progress reports in April before the June Report Card. Parents are informed of student goals in reading, writing and math, based on discussions with their teachers. This practice has served as another way to inform families about the individual goals their child is working on and a specific action plan as to how they can help support their child’s progress. Our school website keeps our parents informed of homework, upcoming events, school curriculum, and calendar events. Student homework is uploaded to student backpack sections and Middle School students are able to access 0  teacher’s individual websites to access assignments, expectations, and rubrics. We communicate teacher expectations with teachers through our email system, morning announcements and memos. Parent partnerships are critical to our student’s success. Parents are invited to the school to participate in "Read Alouds" and share their family cultures. At the beginning of the school year parents are provided with a parent packet in English and Spanish that includes a welcome letter, a parent manual that includes our vision and mission, school procedures, safety, parent involvement, grading policy, values curriculum, homework expectations, lunch schedules and guidelines, health requirements. We also include in the packet, curriculum guides, grade level Next Generation Standards road maps to success, student, teacher and parent expectations, permission slips, assessment calendars, emergency preparedness, internet acceptable and safety policy, and physical education expectations. We work closely with our School Leadership Team. We feel it is important that parent voices are heard and addressed as well as teachers. We provide parent workshops to keep our parents better informed of programs and curriculum, such as Just Right Reading, Middle School Choice, Schoolwide Enrichment Model and Grade Level School Tours. Teachers are provided with a teacher binder that includes expectations for the school year, chancellor regulations and updated information. A presentation is done by the Principal to provide teachers with school expectations, school goals, educational initiatives, student data, and programs. We provide an educational setting where children value education and discover their own uniqueness, personal worth, and academic potential. We believe that by educating the “whole child” children discover the love of learning and become lifelong learners. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. ENL/SWD. Differentiated instruction to meet the individual needs of each of the students and a focus on the beginners who are coming into grades 2-5. For ENL's transferring native language literacy skills to English literacy skills. For SWD's to improve their inferencing skills. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our greatest progress this year in the Framework for Great Schools has been “Strong Family and Community Ties”. We have an seen increase in the number of parents in our building throughout the school year. There has been an increase of 230 families attending our meet and greet at the beginning of the school year and have seen an increase of 5 families per week coming into the school. This has also been evident in the Parent/Teacher Association meetings and attendance at the end of each month for our writing celebrations. Our key area of focus for this school year will again be "Strong Family and Community Ties” and to continue to have opportunities available for parents to be active participants in their child’s learning. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q078 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 706 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 4 32 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 24 32 26 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 27.0% % Attendance Rate 23.7% % Reduced Lunch 4.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 28.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 39.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 12.25 2% 41% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 73.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 100% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 22 23 26 94.3% 2.7% 10.9% 3.7% 22.1% 5.8% 2 7% 5.4 67.4% 91% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A NO N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After conducting an analysis of NYS ELA Assessment data, it was determined that 66% of students performed at levels 3 & 4. It was determined that although there was a 4% increase from the 2016-2017 NYS ELA Assessment, 33% of students performed at Level 2 and below. This is a priority at PS/IS 78. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students, including students with disabilities and ENL students, in grades K-8 will engage in explicit vocabulary instruction, as measured by a .2% increase in performance levels on the NYS ELA Assessment. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will participate in professional development activities such as vocabulary development, strategy lessons and TCRWP benchmark mini lessons around reading comprehension strategies. Administrators and staff will provide targeted professional learning opportunities during Monday Professional Learning time. Teachers Teachers, Administrators, Teacher leaders 80 minutes of Professional Development on Mondays: September 2018-2019 Teachers will attend various relevant professional workshops throughout the year as they become available. Support staff and ENL teachers , including special education teachers will continue to support: the ENL program and special education population, students across grades K-8 struggling to improve vocabulary development and reading comprehension. Teacher teams will meet to review research based vocabulary development. Sept. 2018-Feb. 2019, Feb. 2019-June 2019 Teachers, ENL teachers, IEP teachers, Administrators, Inquiry Facilitators ENL students, students with disabilities, and students demonstrating proficiency that is below grade level. Purchase vocabulary support materials to support all students across grades K-8. All students grades K-8 Sept. 2018-Feb. 2019 Administrators and teachers. The following strategies and programs will be employed to support ENL students and high needs subgroups: strategy lessons, Teacher's College Reading and Writing supplemental units of study, RWP assessment recommendations and strategy lessons. Feb. 2019-June 2019 All Staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 All teachers, Inquiry Teams Vertical Teams Administration 4 Dedicate a portion of lesson time in each content area to: (1) word learning, (2) repeated exposure to new words in multiple oral and written contexts, and (3) providing students with strategies to make them independent vocabulary learners All Staff Sept.2018-June 2019 All teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops given by teachers during Tuesday Parent Engagement from September 2018-June 2019.• Involving parents in the review of program plans. Sharing program information related to parent programs. Maintaining and engaging parents in the development and review of building parent involvement policies. Sharing progress reports through parent-teacher conferences. Sharing information regarding curricula, school accountability data. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The following personnel will be work towards meeting this goal: all teachers including special education teachers and ENL service providers. fundations material, iready, Inquiry Team members, Administrators, 80 minutes Professional Development every Monday, Advance data reports, data sources: instructional software. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Feb. 2019, students in grades k-8 will show an increase in the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Assessments and formative classroom assessments. Students will improve comprehension skills as evidence by moving up one reading level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) TC Running Records and ELA Benchmark Assessment, and NYS ELA Assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We believe at P.S./I.S. 78Q we have done an excellent job working with children in regards to strong character. Each morning we share an inspirational positive Morning Message read by students in both buildings that provide students with words to reflect on to build character by encouraging ethical thinking, to build self-esteem by motivating students to do their personal best, and to build community by inspiring students to contribute to the world around them while honoring the diversity that makes our country great. Strong character culture is reflected in our positive school survey results. Based on student responses to school survey indicates 59% of the students believe they follow school rules. This is priority need since 41% believe students do not follow school rules. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students will receive Respect for All lessons as measured by teachers' lesson plans and classroom observations to promote learning and respectful interactions as evidenced by a 3% increase on the school survey. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? SAPIS workers and guidance counselors will provide professional learning opportunities for teachers so they may better enhance their knowledge and skills around character building, appropriate internet activities and Respect for All and Dignity for Students acts. These learning opportunities will take place during Monday 80 minute professional learning time. All staff September 2018-June 2019 Guidance Counselor and SAPIS workers will open their libraries of resources for teachers to use with their classes. teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, SAPIS worker, Guidance Counselor and teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, SAPIS worker, Guidance Counselor and teachers Respect For All Liaison will attend Professional Learning Opportunities given by the Field Support Center. Teachers will incorporate literature into existing curriculum to enhance student knowledge and awareness in lessons which include: teachers September 2018-June 2019 All Teachers Respect For All, Strong Character, proper internet usage, value of the month program and internet safety. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops given by teachers during Tuesday Parent Engagement from September 2018-June 2019. Guidance Counselor, SAPIS, and Parent Coordinator will be available to address any needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PTA will fund Respect For All Resources and activities. Literature will be purchased to support Respect For All lessons. Guidance Counselor , SAPIS, and Respect for All liaison will attend professional development. Per diem resources will be used to support staff training. will fund Respect For All Resources and activities. 7  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, will have offered at least two professional learning sessions led by the SAPIS work and the Guidance Counselor and Respect For All Liaison for teachers to support this goal. Our midpoint benchmark will indicate that 50% of our students will receive respect for all lessons as evidence by teachers' lesson plans and sign-in sheets and agendas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SAPIS logs/teacher's lesson plans/agendas Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After conducting an analysis of the professional learning inventory of our teachers, NYSED School report Card, NYC Quality Guide and, the Framework for Great Schools-Collaborative Teachers Report, 91% of the teachers believe they collaborate and coordinate their teaching with instruction. There is a need to refine teacher teams to focus on Advanced Literacy. After conducting an analysis of how well teachers work with each other , we have created Professional Learning Community teams to support Advanced Literacy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will engage in inquiry-based, structured professional collaborations that strengthen classroom environments that support advanced literacy to improve communication (orally and in writing), understand and use print for a variety of purposes, and using language to learn, think and communicate effectively as measured by Inquiry Team meeting agendas and minutes and observations of student engagement (3C) of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Learning Community teams will focus on strengthening the instructional core by using research based strategies every other Monday. All staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, and Inquiry Facilitators Teams will focus on change strategies every other Monday to norm rigor by creating tasks aligned to the Next Generation Standards which are assessed in a uniform way. Agendas and minutes of meetings are recorded at each meeting. Create a school-wide Advanced Literacy Team to support Professional Learning Community Teams. 80 minutes during the first and third Monday of each month's Professional Development Lead teachers Professional Learning Community teams will attend professional learning opportunities on Advanced Literacy best practices to support reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills. All staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, and Inquiry Facilitators 80 minutes Professional Development. Vertical teacher teams meet monthly to analyze data and look for trends across grades and best practices. Agendas and minutes will be recorded. Collaborative planning time for teachers across grades of students with special populations (students with disabilities and ELL students) to modify curriculum to address specific needs and best practices, agendas, and minutes and meetings. Special Education teachers, ESL teachers, Gr. 1 Teachers, Purchase Teaching Advanced Literacy Skills book for PLC teams. Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers and Administrators Grade Conferences and Inquiry Team Meetings 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops given by teachers during Tuesday Parent Engagement from September 2018-June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Inquiry Facilitators, administrators, common planning time, data periods, and Monday 80 minute professional development, CCLS instructional materials, and Advanced Literacy Team Professional Development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In Feb. 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the Professional Learning Inventory for Advanced Literacy benchmark instrument. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. To assess progress, the Professional Learning Inventory for Teaching Advanced Literacy skills is our instrument of measure. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After analyzing Measure of Teacher Performance data on Advance for the 2017-2018 school year, we see a positive trend in the engagement of students in the classroom. There has been a 10% increase in 3c of the Danielson Framework. Based on Advance data we see there is a need to continue to improve student engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will create and implement a professional development plan that builds teachers’ capacity to use differentiated questioning and discussion techniques to improve student critical thinking skills, as measured by a 5% increase in teachers improving one performance level reflected in Danielson Framework component 3b Questioning and Discussion Techniques in Advance. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration will create a plan for Professional Learning Opportunities to support this goal. Teachers Teachers Teachers will visit classrooms to share best practices. Teacher leaders will visit schools to bring back to our school and turn-key best practices observed. Teachers Professional Development will be provided to teachers on the following topics on Hess' Cognitive Matrix and Depth of Knowledge Questioning across all content areas. Teachers Anchor charts, strategy lessons, question stems, and modeling will be used to support students with disabilities and ENL students. Administrators, Teacher teams, Inquiry Focused Lead teachers Teachers Teacher Leaders Teacher Leaders & Administrators September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 80 Minute Professional learning time. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops given by teachers during Tuesday Parent Engagement from September 2018-June 2019 to support parents in assisting their child with questioning and discussion techniques. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 3  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher leaders will engage in professional learning during inter-visitations and intra-visitations. Schedule adjustments will be made to allow for teachers leaders to collaborate and visit other classrooms and schools that have shown evidence of success in questioning and discussion techniques. Teacher per diem will be used to support school visits. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase in teacher performance levels on MOTP Report in Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher goals and MOTP Advance Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After conducting an analysis of the Parent Coordinator Log, parent surveys, the School Quality Snapshot, and the Framework for Great Schools Report, there is a need to increase parent communication . After conducting an analysis of parent involvement section of the school survey, the data indicates an increase from 3.95 to 4.06 from the 2017-2018 school survey. We have made increasing parent communication our school priority to better support their children's learning. Parents will participate in monthly writing celebrations with their children and their child's class, increased awareness through the PTA website, school website, and increased email correspondence. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a collaborative partnership with families and community organizations will be strengthened through monthly parent workshops, to support improving student outcomes as measured by a .5% Framework Element score increase in the Strong Family and Community Ties section of the parent survey. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff will improve family outreach and collaborate with school staff to offer parent-involvement and support activities. School staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration and Parent Coordinator Staff will meet with parents to discuss student needs, parent involvement, written notices, and classroom celebrations. School staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration and Parent Coordinator Translation services procured to assist families in better understanding the curriculum, school information and how to support their children in school. Daily parent phone calls and school tours to strengthen the home-school connection and provide families with differentiated support. School staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration School staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration and Parent Coordinator Monthly Parent Workshops: Just Right Reading, Middle School Expectations, Preparing for HS and College, Responding to Literature Strategies, and Questioning and Discussion Techniques. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parent workshops given by teachers during Tuesday Parent Engagement from September 2018-June 2019. Serious Fun Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation (SASF) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 6  40 minutes of parent engagement time each week for planning meetings, workshops, conferences, phone calls, and translation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Feb. 2019, there we will continue to have monthly parent workshops and add additional workshops to support parents needs as indicated through a parent survey to provide strategies to support their children. This increase in parent communication will reflected in the Framework for Great Schools Report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Survey, monthly sign in sheets and agendas Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYS ELA data, TC running records benchmark data, TC Word Identification data, Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group Word Study-Fundations, Words Their Way, TC Reading and Writing strategies, and iReady ELA Online Program When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) School Day, After School and Saturday Classroom performance data, Portfolio Analysis, and MOSL assessment data NYS Math data, Go Math Assessment data, Math Performance Task data, Gr. 6, 7 & 8 MOSL assessment data, classroom assessments and observations, and portfolio analysis NYS Gr. 4 & 8 Science data, Foss Program assessment data, and classroom observations Project based learning assessments, classroom Mathematics Science Social Studies Small Group School Day, After School and Saturday GO Math Scaffold/Differentiated Support Groups, CMP3, iReady Math online Program FOSS Science Support, Harcourt Science Modules, and Robotics Small Group School Day, After School Guided Reading using non-fiction texts Small Group School Day, After School 8 observations, and portfolio analysis PPT referrals and IEP recommendations At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Counseling, at-risk Small Group School Day family intervention work, crisis and mandated support by social worker 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 7 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  Emergency supplies such as backpacks, school supplies and counseling. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 4554 dollars 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Non Title 1 school 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Non Title 1 school Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Non Title 1 school 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Non Title 1 school 2  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Non Title 1 school 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Non Title 1 school 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 3  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 78, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Teacher Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS/IS 78Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 5  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 6  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 78, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and 7  the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 8  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 9  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 0  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: PS/IS 78 This school is (check one): DBN: 30Q078 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 30 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Language Instruction Program: We propose to offer three supplemental after-school ENL classes to enhance the academic language development of our upper-elementary-grade ELLs, along with a Middle School Saturday Academy for 6th, 7th, and 8th grade students. After analyzing our student data we identified three sub-groups of students whom we will target with an after-school program:   1) 3rd Grade ELLs (and former ELLs) 2) 4th Grade ELLs (and former ELLs) 3) 5th Grade ELLs (and former ELLs). Our enrollment data from from the past two years shows that we have two distinct sub-groups of ELLs in grades 3-5 which need supplemental support: lower-level newcomers and newly proficient former ELLs. Our newcomers will need extra support to prepare for the NYS Math exam and our former Ells will benefit from supplemental instruction to help prepare them to meet Next Generation Learning standards and achieves success on the 2019 NYSTP ELA and Math exams. We also observed that our middle school cohort of ELLs and former ELLs are not meeting Next Generation Learning standards at the same rate as their English-proficient peers. We propose to offer our middle school students extra support in the form of a Saturday Academy which will meet for four weeks immediately prior to the State exams in April and May, 2019. ELL After-School Academies We propose three groupings of ELLs and proficient former ELLs, meeting Wednesdays and Thursdays, from 2:30 until 4:00. Each group will be team-taught in English by a licensed common-branch teacher and a licensed ENL teacher, using appropriate ENL methodologies to enhance comprehension. During each 90-minute session, the licensed ENL teacher will teach a 45-minute literacy block, along with a 45- minute math block led by the common branch teacher. Our after-school academies will use supplemental enrichment materials, such as assessment samples from https://www.engageny.org along with Rehearsing for the Common Core Standards (Rally Education). A Supervisor is needed because there is no other program. 10 weeks/ 30 students 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information ELL Saturday Academy Our Saturday Academy will be take place on four consecutive Saturdays, March 2- March 30, 2019, from 9:00am to 11:00am. We will have three groups of students, with each group team-taught in English by a licensed common- branch teacher and a licensed ENL teacher, using appropriate ENL methodologies to enhance comprehension. During each two-hour session, the licensed ENL teacher will teach a one-hour literacy block, along with a one-hour math block led by the common branch teacher. Our Saturday academy will use supplemental enrichment material such as the assessment samples from: https://www.engageny.org along with Rehearsing for the Common Core Standards (Rally Education). A Supervisor is needed because there is no other program. 4 weeks/ 24 students Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development Program – The teachers in our Title III After-School program will need strategies to support the math and literacy learning of their ELL students as they prepare for the rigorous Common Core assessments in the spring.  We will offer monthly professional development sessions for the staff of our Title III-funded after-school program. During these sessions our licensed ENL teacher Andrew Parker will train the teachers with common branch licenses in specific ENL methodologies which will support the learning needs of the ELLs in their after-school programs; teachers with common branch licenses will share instructional techniques to support the literacy and math development of our participating children. Our professional development program will start in November 2018 and continue on a monthly basis. We will use the following online resources offered through the NYCDOE Division of English Language Learners, and the DELLSS'S Partnership with Understanding Language at Stanford University. Professional development agendas and attendance sheets will be maintained in the ENL compliance document file cabinet at the Early Childhood Center building. Text complexity and ELLs: http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/EducatorResources/Text+Complexity+and+English+Language+Learners+-+Building+Vocabulary.htm Teaching vocabulary to ELLs: http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/EducatorResources/vocabELLs Common Core for ELLs: 4  Part C: Professional Development http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/EducatorResources/Common+Core+Framework+for+ELLs.htm http://ell.stanford.edu/publication/realizing-opportunities-ells-common-core-english-language-arts-and-disciplinary-literacy Math instruction for ELLs: http://ell.stanford.edu/publication/mathematics-common-core-and-language Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Involvement: At PTA meetings and SLT committee meetings, parents of our ELLs have expressed an interest in learning more about how they can support their children’s language and literacy development at home. We will offer a series of three parent workshops, facilitated by our licensed ENL teacher Andrew Parker, targeting parents of ELLs and former ELLs, separated into two different levels (K-2 and 3-5). Workshop topics will include study skills, homework help, behavior management, digital media consumption, etc. All invitations/notifications will be sent out in the parents’ preferred language and translation services will be available during the workshops. The workshops will meet for one hour during three consecutive weeks, exact dates TB D . 5 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Teachers: After-School: 10 weeks 5 teachers 3 hours/week $57.83/ hour $8674.50 Supervisory: 10 weeks 1 supervisor 3 hours per week X $59.65/hour = $1789.50 Saturday Academy: 4 weeks 1 teachers 2 hours per week x $57.83/ hour =$462.64 for teachers Supervisory: 4 weeks 1 supervisor 2 hours per week X $59.65./hour = $477.20 Parent Involvement: MS: 2 teachers 2 sessions 1 hour per session 4 hours x $57.83/ hour $231.32 Professional Development: 1 one-hour PD meeting per month 4 months 3 teachers $57.83/hour =$693.96 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $12,366  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 6 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Materials for after school program and Saturday Academy and Parent Workshops.  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $37.00 $12,366.00 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name PS/IS 78Q Borough Queens School Number 078 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Louis Pavone Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Andrew Parker Teacher/Subject Area Victoria Mulligan/ Science Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Jessica Morgan Superintendent Assistant Principal Deana Rombone Coach School Counselor Parent Raquel Salas Parent Coordinator Raquel Salas Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics 8  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 548 Total number of ELLs 34 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.20% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use the TCRWP reading assessment to measure the early literacy skills of our ELLs. We conduct running records on each of our ELLs monthly in order to identify each child’s strengths and weaknesses as a reader, target instruction according to each child’s individual needs, and ensure that each child is reading at the appropriate “just right” level during our independent reading time. Our June 2015 TCRWP running records data indicates that in grades 1 and 2, 6 of the 12 ELLs (50%) are reading at level 1, 5 children (42%) are reading at level 2, and 1 child is reading at level 4. We understand that a child’s reading level is the most important predictor of success on upper-grade exams and we have targeted the students reading at level 1 with additional 9  support. We also use the NYS MOSL Performance Tasks, which give us useful, skill-specific information about student strengths and weaknesses which we can use to differentiate instruction and target interventions. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our LAP committee has noted that ELL students at PS/IS 78 have exceeded the AMAO benchmarks in each of the past three years, but we recognize that the rigorous Common Core Learning Standards are creating new challenges for all our students and we must be prepared to respond accordingly with increasingly rigorous instruction for our ELLs, former-ELLs, and English-proficient students alike. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We use assessment data from every student in each grade (ELLs and English proficient students alike) to determine which students are meeting benchmark standards and which students are at risk for falling behind. School administrators also carefully monitor classroom instruction to ensure that all students are receiving high-quality Tier 1 instruction, including differentiated lessons to meet the language development needs of English Language Learners. If teachers and administrators feel that an ELL student is not meeting benchmark standards in spite of high-quality Tier 1 instruction, the classroom teacher, ESL Teacher, and SBST staff will look at the data to determine which specific skills are lagging and arrange Tier 2 intervention services to provide targeted instruction to address the specific areas of need for each child. We take great care to ensure that our analysis of student assessment data takes into consideration each child’s native language abilities and degree of English Language exposure/ experience. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. A review of the 2015 NYSESLAT results revealed that our students are progressing quickly to the advanced/expanding level, and that some students have stayed at the advanced level for several years before demonstrating full proficiency. This past year all of our 6 th and 7 th grade ELLs achieved full proficience (Commanding level), but none of our 2 nd graders did. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming 0  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our freestanding ENL program consists of standalone ENL instruction for Entering and Emerging students and integrated ENL instruction for more advanced ELLs. Our standalone instruction is offered in a small-roup, in-class setting, usually during the students' independent reading time. Our integrated ENL instruction is delivered through a push-in model, with the ENL teacher and classroom teacher working together to provide academic language support for both the ELL students and their English-proficient peers. ELLs are taught in mixed-level groups, with the instruction differentiated to allow for varied proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In our freestanding ENL program, entering and emerging students receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL instruction each week along with 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Transitioning and expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL instruction per week, and former ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL support during the first two years that follow their achieving the commanding level on the NYSESLAT. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. While providing push-in ENL support during Literacy periods and other content areas (science, social studies and math), the ENL teacher implements a variety of techniques to make content comprehensible and enrich language development, such as pre- teaching unfamiliar vocabulary, modeling, drawing on prior knowledge, using realia and manipulatives, and explicitly developing student awareness of comprehension strategies. The ENL teacher also emphasizes using text-based evidence to support arguments and opinions to ensure that the students are prepared to meet the demands of the CCLS. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Because our Freestanding ENL program does not explicitly teach in the native languages of the students, our native language testing is limited. Spanish-speaking newcomers are assessed with the Spanish Lab if they fall below the proficient level on the NYSITELL, and translation accommodations are made on State exams for eligible ELL students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 1  Subgroups of ELL children at PS/IS 78 receive differentiated instruction based on their specific needs. a) SIFE children are carefully assessed and given targeted academic intervention to address gaps in their formal education. b) Newcomers receive explicit instruction in the reading comprehension skills that they need to meet Common Core Learning standards and succeed on the ELA and content area exams, while using practice texts that are chosen to match each child’s independent reading level. c and d) ELLs who have been receiving service for 4-6 years and long-term ELLs are considered at-risk and receive supplemental intervention services according to their individual needs. e) Former ELLs receive a half unit of ENL support along with test accomodations for two years after they reach proficiency. The ENL Teacher collaborates with classroom teachers to monitor the progress of former ELLs to see if there are any language issues that may be affecting the children’s academic performance. Former ELLs are also invited to participate in Title III-funded after-school programs and Extended Day enrichment groups. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL teacher works closely with the Special Education Coordinator, IEP teachers, and related-service providers to ensure that ELLs with special needs have access to the same curriculum as their English-proficient peers. During the 2015-16 school year we are implementing the ReadyGen literacy curriculum and the Go Math! math curriculum, both of which have been designed to encourage high-level language use and prepare all students to meet the cognitive and linguistic demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. During SETSS instruction, ELL-SWDs work with the same grade-level materials as their general education peers while receiving additional scaffolding such as guided reading and writing support and the use of graphic organizers, manipulatives, and visuals. The IEP Coordinator and ESL Teacher use the SESIS system to monitor the instruction of ELLs with disabilities and ensure that all children are receiving the services that are stipulated on their IEPs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The SETSS teachers and related-service providers provide services using a push-in model as per each student’s IEP in order to ensure that ELL-SWDs receive supported instruction while maximizing the time spent with their general education peers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At all grade and proficiency levels, ELLs who need additional academic support receive small-group, targeted instruction from their classroom teachers and academic intervention staff. ELLs who require additional support with Social Studies or Science receive targeted interventions in the form of small-group instruction and cooperative, peer-based partnerships. Classroom teachers respond to individual student needs with lessons targeted to the areas of weakness that are revealed in each child’s assessment data. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? As we complete the expansion of our middle school (adding grade 8 in 2015-16) we will be adding additional programming including sports and foreign language instruction. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have ended our partnership with the Virtual Y after-school program and are now offering after-school activities to all students through the Serious Fun program. 2  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We offer a variety of after-school programs and take special care to ensure that all families in our school community are informed about our supplemental enrichment programs and have the opportunity to apply for the programs in a timely way. We provide information and applications for all programs in English and Spanish (our most-frequent second language), and place phone calls to the parents who speak lower-incidence languages to ensure that everyone understands the opportunities that are available to their children. ELLs at PS/IS 78 attend our Title III-funded after-school academies for ELLs and former-ELLs in grades 3-8 and our Saturday Academic Support Academies. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our classroom leveled libraries include texts that have been selected for ELLs because of their enhanced picture support and other supportive text features. The Assistant Principal and ENL Teacher collaborate in the use of school funds to purchase books that are appropriate for ELLs as they participate in their class’s literary genre studies and non-fiction content-area instruction. We recently purchased sets of graphic novels in order to provide ELLS with maximum picture support for vocabulary development. The classroom teachers and content area teachers supplement appropriately-leveled reading materials with web-based and software-based reading and math programs, and the ENL teacher uses realia and manipulatives to enhance the ELL student understanding of key language and content concepts. Spanish-speaking students in need of Native Language materials have access to our school library, which has a selection of fiction and non-fiction books in Spanish, and our Science program includes Spanish versions of the published materials in order to support the learning needs of literate newcomers from Spanish-speaking countries. All children have access to laptop and desktop computers, where they can access web-based literacy resources such as Starfall, Renzulli, and Bookflix or use productivity software to create writing projects, presentations, and reports. Each classroom is wired with SmartBoard technology in order to create interactive word-work and shared reading activities to enhance student literacy development. All students, including ELLs, in grades 6 through 8 are provided with their own personal iPadMini computer tablets to facilitate reading, writing, and research. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? While the goal of our freestanding ENL program is to help ELL children achieve full English proficiency as quickly as possible, we understand that some newcomers could benefit from native language support as they make the transition into a monolingual English environment. Native Language support is provided to newcomer ELLs by pairing them with classroom partners who share their home language, offering them access to native language texts as they make the transition to English literacy, providing them with online Native Language resources such as Colorín Colorado and Spanish Bookflix, and by celebrating their home language and culture whenever possible through thematic study units, cultural exhibitions, and in-class presentations. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We differentiate our services to ELLs based on each student’s individual proficiency level and learning needs. ELLs in the early- childhood grades have the freedom to choose the subject matter for their own writing, drawing, and reading, a process which ensures that the materials and themes are age-appropriate. We work hard to ensure that upper-grade ELLs are receiving instruction and using materials which will prepare them for success on the State exams and help them to meet the challenges of the Common Core Learning Standards. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our classroom leveled libraries include texts that have been selected for ELLs because of their enhanced picture support and other supportive text features. The Assistant Principal and ENL Teacher collaborate in the use of school funds to purchase books that are appropriate for ELLs as they participate in their class’s literary genre studies and non-fiction content-area instruction. We recently purchased sets of graphic novels in order to provide ELLS with maximum picture support for 3  vocabulary development. The classroom teachers and content area teachers supplement appropriately-leveled reading materials with web-based and software-based reading and math programs, and the ENL teacher uses realia and manipulatives to enhance the ELL student understanding of key language and content concepts. Spanish-speaking students in need of Native Language materials have access to our school library, which has a selection of fiction and non-fiction books in Spanish, and our Science program includes Spanish versions of the published materials in order to support the learning needs of literate newcomers from Spanish-speaking countries. All children have access to laptop and desktop computers, where they can access web-based literacy resources such as Starfall, Renzulli, and Bookflix or use productivity software to create writing projects, presentations, and reports. Each classroom is wired with SmartBoard technology in order to create interactive word-work and shared reading activities to enhance student literacy development. All students, including ELLs, in grades 6 through 8 are provided with their own personal iPadMini computer tablets to facilitate reading, writing, and research. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our Pre-K children who speak a language other than English at home are included in visits to the Kindergarten classes to help them to prepare for the transition into Kindergarten, while the parents of incoming Kindergarten children are given a tour of the school building and attend the workshop “Moving Up: Making the Transition into Kindergarten.” During these orientation programs we arrange translation services for parents who are unable to communicate in English. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Middle-school ELLs and their English-proficient peers are offered Spanish language classes. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? During the 2015-16 school year our professional development focus has been on supporting teachers of ELLs with the information and strategies they need to support ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. As we plan our PD activities, we take care to include all staff who are working on the behalf of ELLs at our school, including all common branch teachers, the Assistant Principal, paraprofessionals, SBST staff, related service providers, school secretaries and the parent coordinator. We are encouraging all staff who work with ELLs to take advantage of the After School Professional Development Program (ASPDP), which is offering courses such as: "Content-based Instructional Strategies for ELLs," "Common Core State Standards for English Language Learners," and "Improving English Language Learner Instruction through the Use of Technology." Additionally we have the opportunity to use Chancellor’s Conference Days on November 3rd and June 9th to send teachers of ELLs to conferences and symposia sponsored by the Office of English Language Learners. 4  Using the school-based option to devote every Monday afternoon to professional development, we are able to offer all professional staff who work with ELLs the opportunity to receive ongoing professional development support, with a focus on supporting teachers in delivering Common Core-aligned instruction, via webinars and other online learning opportunities through Pearson’s Teachability website, the Go Math! teacher portal, EngageNY, and Stanford University's Understanding Language program. Recent PD sessions include: "Best Practices in ENL Instruction," "ELLs and the Common Core," and "Scaffolding the Common Core for ELLs and SWDs." 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We offer support to teachers of ELLs to ensure that they are able to assist ELLs as they make the transition from elementary school to middle school. Our fifth-grade ELLs have special needs as they prepare to move up to 6th grade, either at our own Intermediate School program or at a different middle school, and we want the children and their families to fully understand their school-choice options so that they can find a middle school that will meet each child’s individual academic needs. Our Guidance Counselor attends an annual network-level training on assisting families (including the families of ELL students) with the middle-school articulation process. The Guidance Counselor in turn assists classroom teachers of ELLs with the elementary-to-middle school articulation process, ensuring that they have up-to-date information about middle-school opportunities for their students. She meets with fifth graders to help them identify the personal goals, needs, and interests which might inform their middle-school preferences. The Guidance Counselor offers parent workshops in December in which she explains the middle school application process and distributes application materials from local middle schools and charter schools. The Guidance Counselor also makes sure that printed materials are available in the home languages of our school community and that oral translators are available to assist at the meetings. Our Assistant Principal asks teachers to regular submit documentation of their participation in ELL-specific professional development, keeping the information in a binder in order to ensure that all teachers are meeting the minimum requirement. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Taking advantage of our dedicated Parent Outreach time after school on Tuesdays, the ENL teacher meets with each parent at least once a year to discuss their child's progress and address any questions or concerns. Translation and intrepretation support is available if needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We offer many opportunities for ELL parents to come into the school, speak with teachers, and get involved in their children’s learning. These opportunities consist of ELL Orientation meetings for parents of new ELLs, workshops during the fall by the Assistant Principal to introduce the academic curricula (math, science, etc.) and in the spring to offer information about the ELA, Math, Science and NYSESLAT exams to the parents of ELL children and their classmates. During the winter months, classroom teachers, with the support of the Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator, offer workshops to support parents in the use of the I-Ready and Renzulli online learning programs with their children at home.In June we offer a Getting Ready for 5  Summer workshop, where the Assistant Principal and ENL Teacher present ideas for continuing children’s education during the summer months. We used Title III funding to purchase Family Literacy kits (with wipe-off boards, markers, magnetic letters, interlocking cubes, and number cards) to give to parents during a series of ELL Emerging Literacy support groups for ELL parents and their K-2 children. ELL parents receive invitations and follow-up phone calls to ensure a high rate of attendance at student performances and celebrations. The Parent Coordinator encourages ELL parents to serve as guest readers at our Read-Aloud Day, chaperones on class field trips, and members of PTA decision-making committees. At all parent events we provide translators if requested, either through parent volunteers or contracted staff from the DOE Department of Translation Services. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Louis Pavone, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS/IS 78 School DBN: 30Q078 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Louis Pavone Title Principal Deana Rombone Assistant Principal Raquel Salas Parent Coordinator Andrew Parker ENL/Bilingual Teacher Raquel Salas Parent Victoria Mulligan, Science Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Jessica Morgan School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q078 School Name: PS/IS 78Q Superintendent: Dr. Composto The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At the beginning of the school year we determined all of our parents' preferred languages by viewing the RAPL report on ATS, along with the parents' resopnses to the preferred language questions on the HLIS and their responses to the preferred language prompt on the emerrgency contact information cards. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 9 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish: both oral and written Bengali: oral and written Chinese: oral and written 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Welcome letter, September. Recess Notifications, Ongoing Parent-Teacher Conference letters: September, November, March, and May Test workshops, March Field Trip Notification/Consent, as needed. Report cards, throughout the year 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 0  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent-teacher conferences: September, November, March, and May ELL parent conferences: ongoing Test workshops: March Informal parent meetings with teachers: as needed 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Prior to the first day of classes, the school's LAC and Assistant Principal post the required notifications in a prominent location at the main entrance of each school building, along with the Language ID Guides at the security desks and the main offices in both of our buildings. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We carefully monitor the results of the School Survey to ensure that parents are satisfied with their ability to communicate with school staff in their preferred languages. 1 
