 28Q086 School Name: P.S. Q086 Principal: ROSITA RIVERA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 28Q086 Public School Q086 342800010086 Pre-K - 5 87-41 Parsons Blvd., Jamaica NY 11432 (718)291-6264 Phone Number: (718)297-0298 Fax: Rosita Rivera Rrivera15@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Rosita Rivera Michael Terpstra ShahanaShahriar Jacqueline Crespo Glenda Santos N/A N/A KrystalieColon District Information Geographical District: 28 Mabel Muniz-Sarduy Superintendent: 90-27 Sutphin Blvd., Jamaica, NY 11435 Superintendent’s Office Address: MSarduy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 557-2618 Phone Number: (718) 557-2623 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 82-01 RockawayBlvd. Queens, NY 11416 MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718)281-3259 Phone Number: (718)348-2997 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rosita Rivera Michael Terpstra ShahanaShahriar Miriam Archilla N/A RadiyyaAjim SonalR. Acharya *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Teresa Jackson Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview P.S. 86 is a professional learning community that impacts student learning outcomes for all students, especially ELL’s and SWD’s through the use of explicit vocabulary instruction, quality discussion, and tiered tasks. To further enhance teacher pedagogy, school leaders create tiered Professional Developments using data obtained from teacher   observations emphasizing Domain 3, Instruction. To identify our school needs, we have instituted systems and structures that track and monitor student and teacher performance, that builds trust and community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 86Q is located in Jamaica, Queens. This Pre-Kindergarten through fifth grade school serves a population of approximately 860 students from culturally diverse backgrounds. The school is set in an active mix of a commercial and residential area. P.S. 86 allows for a variety of instructional practices which address the needs of each students’ learning style. Students are active participants in the learning process resulting in an engaging learning environment. The school employs various learning programs to ensure that these goals and standards are met. We evaluate our successes by discussing and looking at what is effectively working and what is not through careful examination of our data. We review the data and use the prescribed interventions for each individual child’s profile in order to increase student growth and promote our instructional focus for the school year. This work has provided us with a baseline to monitor student growth and development. A variety of school teams including Measures of Student Learning (MOSL), Inquiry, Behavior Intervention, Positive Behavioral Intervention Systems (PBIS), Academic Intervention Services (AIS), and Response to Intervention (RTI) have been created to support and improve overall student achievement and personal development. The school’s focus on fostering collaboration among staff members has served to facilitate common planning, inquiry work, and both vertical and horizontal articulation. Teacher Focus Groups utilize both formative and summative assessment results to drive best instructional practices including, but not limited to, scaffolded and open ended questions, a Universal Design for Learning, introduction and mastery of academic vocabulary, and flexible groupings based on instructional assessment and expectations. We continue to utilize a vertical team in Teacher Rounds this year focusing on student engagement across the curriculum. This practice will yield a greater understanding of expectations across grade levels. Teachers and the administration create an environment of respect and rapport at P.S. 86 through the various ways that they interact with students and each other. We have created a collaborative school culture that extends beyond the walls of the school building into the community at large. We recognize the importance of including parents and community members in school activities in order to foster students’ academic and social success. We have incorporated PBIS throughout the building. Safety, organization, achievement, and respect are of foremost importance and children “S.O.A.R” throughout the day. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have a large number of ENLs, predominantly, Bengali and Spanish. Our ENLs need a great deal of support from teachers, parents and administrators. In September 2018, we will have expanded our Dual Language Program from Kindergarden to first grade. This program provides instruction in both languages, English and Spanish simultaneously. ENLs need discussion prompts, visual supports, vocabulary development and a lot of guided discussions amongst their peers to build language that strategically target all four modalities. We are providing training for teachers to help meet the needs of all the ENLs. In addition, to help assist classroom teachers in the lower grades K-2, we have now instituted a self-contained ESL class in Kindergarten to help students learn English. ESL providers have been assigned to work collaboratively with classroom teachers so that they may plan together and utilize effective ESL strategies to support language acquisition for all ENLs. 0  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Teachers began working collaboratively last school year and they were given many opportunities to work as a team to make decisions, pivotal to their assigned grades. This school year we are providing a lot of support to teachers that will help improve pedagogue and impact student learning outcomes. Monday Pds are being used based on teacher needs and are differentiated, accordingly. In addition, monies are being used to purchase core-materials school wide to support teachers in providing qualitative daily instruction aligned to CCLS grade appropriate, as opposed to having teachers create their own curriculum and gathering resources. Teachers will have cohesiveness in instruction school wide and now can utilize supplemental resources to enhance the core-curriculum and close the achievement gap. In addition, assistant principals are being supported by attending PDs, in-house, as well as outside the building, that will help support them when conducting observations, meeting compliance and mandates that are assigned to them, including becoming instructional leaders. These supports will assist administrators in the decision-making process to reach a consensus when making sound decisions and help further improve teacher practices by creating a toolbox of effective strategies. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q086 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 03,04,05,06 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 944 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 84 84 34 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 34 34 5 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 78.0% % Attendance Rate 75.2% % Reduced Lunch 30.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.3% 33.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.25 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 47.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 88% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 74 74 34 92.7% 1.7% 16.9% 7.8% 50.5% 3.7% 4 2% 7.4 50.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A NO YES YES YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school's strengths relative to this Framework element are that all teachers, school wide are using Go Math with fidelity as the core curriculum program which is Common Core aligned in all grade levels. In addition, Fridays have been designated for planning small group targeted instruction based on current analysis of testing data. These Fridays are considered solely for planning and assigned Math Stations, based on students' needs. The peer collaborative teachers have been working with classroom teachers across all grades and including new teachers to secure that their content knowledge improves and instructional practices to impact student learning outcomes. After analyzing the historical data for the past three years, including the last PPO in 2018 conducted by the Superintendent, Mrs. Sarduy an area of continued focus is in the Instructional Core 1.2. We need to to further develop pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best with consistency, across all classrooms to ensure that multiple entry points and appropriate scaffolds are used that will impact student learning outcomes for all sub-groups: ELLs, SWDs, lowest third and students on or above grade level. After analyzing all the data sources and taking all the findings into account, it is evident that this school year 2018-2019, we need to create systems and structures in mathematics to track and monitor individual student progress at set interim benchmarks across grades 3, 4 and 5 for teachers to use that will drive classroom targeted instruction in whole or small group solely dependent upon the major common core standards, across each grade level. A pacing schedule will be created and a curriculum overview using GO Math that will secure mastery of content standards and mathematical practices. A math consultant will work closely to create Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) in each grade 3,4 and 5 for 12 sessions throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Each of the competencies in Domain 3 will be reviewed in depth that will further develop mathematical understandings including supplementing curriculum with teacher created games to reinforce prerequisite skills and concepts. At the first meeting, teachers will analyze the Go Math Baseline Assessment as a baseline to identify strengths and challenges based on the prior year's Common Core Math State Standards 3  covered. The math consultant will meet with upper grade classroom teachers for each unit to unpack essential instructional strategies and to discuss effective pedagogue practices aligned to content and mathematical practices. The math consultant will also work with all classroom teachers in grades 3,4 and 5 to discuss the Eight Mathematical Practices and a major focus will be given to three CCSS Mathematical Practices: MP1 Make sense of problems and persevere in solving them, MP3 Construct viable arguments and critique the reasoning of others, and MP4 Model with mathematics. Due to the vast number of ELLs in the upper grades and to further develop their English language and content development, teachers will also partake in creating tasks using Mathematical Language Routines created by Stanford University Graduate School of Education. The framework consist of four design principles: Support sense-making, Optimize output, Cultivate conversation and Maximize linguistic and cognitive meta-awareness. There are eight optimal mathematical language routines that teachers will be introduced to that will be effective in learning mathematical practices, language and content cohesively. In addition, the principal will be conducting a series of data workshops centered around math where teachers will first analyze the Math CCSS performance of all students on their ROCLs across grades 3,4 and 5 to drive instruction. Teachers will create action plans for six to eight weeks and standards will be assessed on two set Math interim benchmarks that will help track and monitor individual progress of all students; including SWDs, ELLs, lowest third and students performing on or above grade level. Teachers will reinforce content and mathematical practices, on grade level aligned to CCSS in Math in small or whole group. Also, teachers across each testing grade will identify the gaps in the curriculum to supplement using resources from Engage NY or websites given by the math consultant to secure the major CCSS in Math are addressed, including using the Coherence Map to teach students across grade standards based on their abilities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers of grades 3-5 will have engaged in a continual Math Professional Learning Community that will ensure that the next learning steps to students are clear, purposeful and data driven as evidenced by 15% increase at or above level 3 on the school designed math assessment. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). An ongoing analysis of data will take place through inquiry work during the additional preparation period that teachers will be receiving weekly and Professional Work Time on Tuesdays (2:55-3:35) once a month. An inquiry approach to analyzing student work will be incorporated into professional development sessions. Through consistent analysis of pre-assessments, chapter tests and mock assessments, teachers will be able to assess not only the strengths and challenges of students but will also be able to modify instructional practices to best suit students' needs. Specific practices that will be put in place include but are not limited to teacher rounds, inter-visitations, curriculum mapping, and best practices for SWDs, ELLs, lowest third and students performing on or above grade level. Authentic work will be analyzed using an inquiry approach to determine next steps in the educational process for them. To further make instruction rigorous, we will use data from a modified pre-assessment in Go Math for each chapter that are geared towards the three components of the CCLS; fluency, conceptual understanding and application. Students in grades 3-5 will be receiving additional support working with a math cluster teacher. Small groups will be created based on data from the previous end of year and the current beginning of the year math assessment. In addition, formative daily data will be used to help develop fluency, application and the conceptual understanding of multiplication and fractions. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers Grade leaders Math Consultant Administrators Students Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 In Grades 3-5 all students will be given the Baseline Go Math Assessment (September) to determine strengths and challenges for students individually. Students September 2018 – June 2019 In Grades 4-5 all classroom teachers will analyze CCSS Math 2018 results (September) to identify patterns across each grade and individual areas of strengths and challenges . Teachers Grade leaders Administrators 5 In Grades 3-5, twice per year (November and March) NYS mock assessments in Math will be conducted and analyzed by classroom teachers. Additional remediation will be provided for students during the school day and after school, through RTI built into our prep schedule on Tuesdays and Thursdays. Students below grade level Teachers September 2018, January 2019, March 2019, and June 2019 Integration of technology (Think Central) to make lessons interactive and increase students' interest. Teachers will also incorporate math games to increase fluency, reinforce skills and concepts. For all students September 2018 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Once a month, beginning in October, during Tuesdays family engagement 2:20pm-3:00pm parent workshops will be scheduled across grades 3 through 5 to introduce CCSS in Math and to teach them strategies to help their children succeed in their current grade level. Translators will be made available so that all parents in the community can participate. In addition, websites and games that make learning math fun and interactive will be introduced. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All classroom teachers in grades 3-5 will work closely with a math consultant from Generation Ready that will help guide and further support teacher pedagogue in a series of math PDs. These math PDs will take place on Mondays from 2:20 pm to 3:40pm. Instructional resources that will be use are Engage NY and Achieve The Core. All classroom teachers in grades 3-5 will attend a series of data workshops given by administrators to help them analyze student performance on set interim benchmarks to create action plans for six to eight week intervals for whole or small group instruction aligned to major math common core standards. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 6  The Math Professional Learning Community will be analyzing, tracking, and monitoring student work to make strategic adjustments to math instruction that will ensure that the next steps to students are clear, purposeful and data driven. Baseline Go-Math assessment will be given to all students across grades 3-5 to identify student individual strengths and challenges based on grade level math content. The data that will be used to measure growth will be the Go Math Beginning of the Year, Middle of the Year (showing a 7.5% growth) and End of the Year (showing a 7.5% growth) Math assessments. By February 2019, administration will evaluate the progress of our mid-point benchmark assessments of students to ensure next steps for student improvement. This will allow for necessary updates to be made. Set interim benchmarks, math mock assessments will be customized based on current units covered twice a year (November and March) to afford teachers across grades 3-5 with multiple opportunities to target instruction, create action plans and track and monitor student progress. Administrators will meet with classroom teachers at set math interim benchmarks to discuss the current student data and to discuss instructional implications. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) In grades 3-5 the Go Math Baseline Assessment will be used as a Math Baseline assessment, as well as the 2018 Math CCSS assessment results. The math interim benchmarks, twice a year will be used to track and monitor student progress in November and March. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In alignment with the Capacity Framework element, Supportive Environment, PS 086 will continue to support teachers by educating them about the different strategies and practices they can use to help support the ENL and SWD students in their classrooms. Last school year, 2017-2018, ENL and SWD teachers were sent to numerous Professional Development workshops where they attained knowledge of various strategies to assist teachers with helping their students achieve meeting the New York State standards and their individual goals. During the 2017-2018 school year, over 33% of our schools population were ENL students. Due to the large population, it was important that teachers learn ENL strategies to help guide their planning and instruction to better meet the needs of the ENL students. In addition, teachers of students with disabilities needed to learn how to support their students by writing quality IEPs and learning new strategies to help their students meet their individual goals. During the 2017-2018 school year, the ENL and special education teachers presented workshops to the staff where important information was shared to help support teaching and learning in the classroom. For example, the ENL teachers taught the staff different assessments that can be used with their students, as well as ways to differentiate the curriculum for English Language Learners. They focused on improving the Listening, Reading, Writing, and Speaking Skills of ELLS. Over the course of the school year, teachers supported the linguistic development of their students by exposing them to lessons aligned to the core curriculum, and using strategies and skills to help elevate the academic achievement of their students. The special education teachers took part in a series of workshops that focused on writing quality IEPs, differentiating their instruction to meet the needs of each student, and SDI (Specially Designed Instruction). These workshops helped the special education teachers learn various ways to provide rigorous instruction, but also meet the needs of each individual student. 8  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will have used instructional literacy strategies gleamed from their professional learning opportunities to increase student reading levels leading to a 5% increase in the number of ENLs and SWDs reading on or above grade level. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ENL and SWD teachers will attend monthly meetings to learn new and innovative strategies to help teach their students. The ENL and SWD teachers will turnkey the information they learned during Monday afternoon professional development sessions. During grade level meetings, teachers will discuss how they are tracking and monitoring their students through Raz-Kids, guided reading, TC running records, and Compass Learning. Each teacher will be assigned a cohort of students that they will track and monitor for the entire year. During differentiated instruction group work, teachers will implement ENL and Special Education strategies in order to elevate academic achievement, provide rigorous instruction, and meet the needs of each individual student. Teachers will use progress monitoring tools like Raz Kids (rotating schedule 3 times a week), Compass Learning, guided reading and Teachers College running records. To address the ELLs we will attempt to send home correspondences in their native language. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students in all grades, SWDs and ELLs September 2018 - June 2019 ENL teachers, Special Education teachers, Service Providers, Classroom teachers, Administrators Students in all grades, SWDs and ELLS September 2018-June 2019 Students in all grades, SWDs and ELLs September 2018 - June 2019 ENL teachers, Special Education teachers, Service Providers, Classroom teachers, Administrators ENL teachers, Special Education teachers, Service Providers, Classroom teachers, Administrators All grades September 2018- June 2019 ENL teachers, Classroom teachers, Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 0  We will provide a variety of parent workshops during the school year (September 2018- June 2019). we will provide training and materials for parents on how to improve study habits and various academic subjects. Parents will be provided with opportunities to participate in monthly workshops (September 2018-June 2019) that will address: Understanding the Common Core Standards, Grade specific curricula, Understanding IEP's, Strategies to help our ELL students, Resources to help students with homework. We will also teach parents what programs are available at school and how to use them at home. The programs that will be explained are Raz-Kids and Compass Learning. The parents will also be told to continuously practice site words in order to increase their child's vocabulary. Parent night - September and May; monthly PTA meetings; monthly SLT meetings; monthly classroom celebrations; Science fair; parent workshops facilitated by pedagogical staff; parent coordinator events; father's day breakfast; mother's day breakfast; school trips; English as a second language classes for parents. Parents will become partners in the school community and the majority of all correspondences will be sent home in parents native language. An appointment book will be kept in the main office for parents to schedule a meeting with classroom teachers on any Tuesday afternoon. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Framework for Teaching (FfT), Framework for Great Schools, Mentoring Guide for Principals, Intranet Advance/MOSL resources, A Handbook for Professional Learning, EngageNY Resources & Protocols and School District Support . We will utilize the free translation services being offered by the DOE by planning ahead of time, to give the office of translation three to four weeks notice when requesting materials to be translated. Student incentives and refreshments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019 school year, the ENL and Special Education teachers will demonstrate an increase of 42.5% from set teacher observation cycles that compare cycle 1 to cycle 2 in Domain 3, as measured by Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE Teacher data from MOTP report. 1  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After conducting a comprehensive assessment of our school’s academic program in response to this element of the Framework for Great Schools (Collaborative Teachers) using such data sources as Advance, Quality Review, School Quality Snapshot, the N.Y.C. School Survey and other relevant data sources, our major findings are that teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement, specifically Domain 3, Instruction. An area of weakness in our school is data analysis and identifying specific next steps, across the grade, on how to adjust instruction.We received a developing rating on our PPO for component 1.2: develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best. It was observed that current pedagogical practice indicates an inconsistency or lack of awareness of instructional shifts; how the learning target or language objective connects to the student tasks, and inaccuracy of content knowledge in teachers' instructional practice. Teacher teams work collaboratively to analyze assessment data and student work during common preps. This results in improved pedagogical practice as well as improvement in progress of student learning outcomes within the classroom. However, not all teachers have received a highly effective rating in this component during formal and informal observations. Formative assessments need to be evident throughout instruction in order to yield clear data indicating standard growth and understanding for all students. According to Quality Review indicator 1.1 we will work on further developing and ensuring engagement of instruction is accessible to a variety of learners and is aligned to the CCLS. We will work to implement and ensure the following is evident across classrooms and across all curriculum areas:  Ongoing accountable talk among students such as discussion prompts and questioning techniques.  Ongoing formative assessment throughout the lesson resulting in data trends based on those informal assessments as evidenced by record keeping among teachers.  Cooperative Learning groupings and tiered tasks aligned to the learning target and CCSS.  Differentiated instruction based on student needs across curriculum areas. According to the June 2018 TCRWP benchmark out of 860 students school wide, 56% of our school is reading below grade level. In Kindergarten 53% of our students are reading below grade level; First grade 67.% ; Second grade 52%; Third grade 49%; Fourth grade 69% and in Fifth grade 45% . Out of the 860 students school wide, 49% of our school is reading on or above grade level. In Kindergarten 46%; First grade 32%; Second grade 48%; Third grade 51%; Fourth grade 31%; and in Fifth grade 54%. 3  Based on the reading data analyzed, it is crucial to use a reading program such as Wonders using a balanced literacy model, to accelerate the reading levels, comprehension, phonemic/phonological awareness, and fluency school wide. To better meet the instructional goal of building coherence school- wide, the Reading Wonders Program has been utilized for grades K-4 while grade 5 uses Ready Gen. Wonders is Common Core aligned, providing teachers with a wealth of resources used to cover all the key elements of balanced literacy, including a balance of literary and informational text. In grades K-4 all students, including SWDs, ELLs, lowest third and students on or above grade level, will be challenged with the resources included for close reading of complex text, foundational skills, leveled readers with differentiated texts, essential questions, vocabulary acquisition, speaking, listening and writing. Teachers will be provided professional development by a staff developer and administration who will craft out a Professional Development plan for their assigned grade, roll out throughout the school year 2018-2019. Teachers will collaborate with other teachers to plan and prepare lessons and activities to meet the needs of all students. Beginning in September, at the first professional development session, teachers will specifically be addressing each grade's need. All the components will be introduced, a flow of the day will be crafted for teachers to follow during instructional time in order to secure that it is comprehensively followed. Feedback will be given by teachers in their PLCs that will take into account how effectively Wonders is in addressing the needs of our student populations. The existing gaps in the curriculum will be addressed, and all effective instructional practices which teachers have come across, will be implemented. Teachers will determine what will be needed to supplement or perhaps extend the curriculum, based on quarterly assessment results. In the dual language kindergarten and first grade classrooms, Maravillas, which is the Spanish version of Wonders will be used. Developing instructional goals and maintaining a focus on reading in all the grades is crucial in order for students to read on grade level, including complex text in literature and informational text, especially students in grades 3-5 who will be taking the Common Core English Language Arts assessment in 2019. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will have used instructional literacy strategies acquired from their professional learning opportunities to increase student reading levels resulting in a 22% increase of students' reading at or above benchmark grade levels as measured by the Teacher College Running Records. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). An ongoing analysis of scaffolding will take place through inquiry work during allotted professional development on Mondays as well as during professional planning time on Tuesdays. Professional development topics to address the needs of students with disabilities, English Language Learners, and other high-need student subgroups will include but are not limited to modifying instructional practices, text-based support, and classroom groupings to best meet the needs of these students. Development of language objectives aligned to the content objectives within a lesson to help all ELL students develop oral and written communication. We will develop our students' vocabulary by immersing them in frequent use of higher level vocabulary in both a verbal and written method, throughout all content areas. Development of lessons that target reading level behaviors, sight words, literal and inferential questions. Using the results of TCRWP reading benchmark assessments teachers will: Create action plans based on running record analysis Group students by current reading level to provide guided reading instruction Use reading level cards to reinforce and/or introduce reading behaviors, vocabulary, sight words and guided questions that will increase fluency and comprehension. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Peer Collaborative Teachers, Classroom Teachers All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Peer Collaborative Teachers, Classroom Teachers 5 Peer collaborative teachers and administrators will provide support for teachers whose data demonstrates stagnate or minimal growth in accelerating reading levels. PD will be provided as well as inter-class visitations, and mentor teachers will be assigned to students who according to the data, are accelerating reading levels. Teacher teams use inquiry work to assess and analyze student performance. Strategies including formative and summative assessments will be used regularly to assess evidence of learning. Based on this information, teachers work in teams to create multiple entry points, ongoing checks for understanding, while monitoring students' learning outcomes. Teachers will also work in teams to successfully differentiate instruction to address individual students' misunderstandings. During professional collaboration meetings, teacher teams will engage in inquiry based discussions, centering around authentic student work and best practices. As a result, inquiry work will further develop mastery levels for student progress as well as prioritize next steps of instruction. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 PCTs, grade leaders, and administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent night - September and May; monthly PTA meetings; monthly SLT meetings; monthly classroom celebrations; parent workshops facilitated by pedagogical staff; parent coordinator events; father's day breakfast; mother's day breakfast, and school trips. Classes for parents on Saturday mornings, will commence in November. Our ELL popluation of parents will be provided English classes from a licensed ENL teacher, and will attend parent workshops to learn how to better help their children succeed in school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. NYSTL monies have been allocated to purchase reading Wonders program for grade 5. In the fall when monies will be acquired based on students registered, the Spanish Reading Wonders program will be purchased for all Dual language classes. On-going professional development will be provided by all administrators and staff developer during Monday afternoon PDs, once a month and/or grade common preps Teacher coverage as necessary, teacher schedule adjustments. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 6  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Quarterly interim benchmark cycles will be scheduled to engage all teachers in progress monitoring. An overall reading goal will be set for every student school wide on a spread sheet that will track and monitor student progress at every cycle. By February 2019, 11% of students will move up school wide from levels 1 and 2 to a level 3 or higher. Teachers will create action plans for six to eight weeks to secure we meet our June goal of a 22% increase of students moving up school wide from levels 1 and 2 to a level 3 or higher. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TCRWP data conducted from running record interim benchmarks and guided reading conference notes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At PS 86 it is clear that pedagogue practices continue to improve in two major Competencies from Domain 3, Instruction from the Danielson Framework used on Advance to observe teachers. According to the Advance Observation Dashboard reports for school year 2017-2018. In Domain 3: 3B Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques 70.49% of all teachers observed performed at Effective demonstrating an 11% increase when compared to school year 2016-2017, 18.85% performed at Highly-Effective, 10.66% performed at Developing. 3C Engaging Students in Learning 70.80% of all teachers observed performed at Effective, 20.35% of all teachers observed performed at Highly-Effective and 7.96% performed at Developing. 3D Using Assessment in Instruction 62.00% of all teachers observed performed at Effective, 30.00% of all teachers observed performed at Highly-Effective and 8.00% performed at Developing. This Domain is at the heart of teaching because teachers monitor and track individual student progress by asking guided questions that deepen student understanding across content areas by crafting activities and grouping students that will further challenge students to think critically and develop their learning. The series of differentiated PDs in Domain 3 provided to teachers helped elevate most of the competencies when comparing school year 2016-2017 to school year 2017-2018. In addition, the administrators provided teachers with actionable feedback that best improves teacher pedagogue and impacts student learning outcomes. Our Spring 2017 PPO indicated a rating of Developing for component 5.1: evaluating the quality of school level decisions and making adjustments as needed resulting in an increased coherence of policies and practice across the school. It was determined there is inconsistency in evaluating the impact and outcomes with teacher instructional practices. Also, according to the School and Teacher Level MOTP 2016-2017 report on Advance that details the monthly and cumulative observations all teachers were observed at least once by December and mostly all were mainly observed for the remainder of their observations based on the option each teacher chose in May. Based on the observation teacher reports from Advance, it is evident that teachers were not observed in a timely fashion or given actionable feedback that would further develop pedagogue practices and impact student learning outcomes. Also, as per the Advance reports many of the elements and/or components were not observed a number of times, however there appears to be room to continue to improving this school year 2018-2019 on the technical aspects of our process of observations and actionable feedback. Our Spring 2018 PPO indicated a rating of proficient for Quality Review Indicator 5.1 which demonstrated progress from last year's PPO. All school year we worked on furthering developing teacher pedagogy by monitoring and revising systems and structures based on our analyzing of each teacher cycle. In addition, we monitored closely Domain 3, offered a series of PDs in components 3B and 3D to impact student learning outcomes. 8  In order to further support the development of teacher pedagogy, instructional leaders, principal, and both assistant principals, will be equitably assigned a cohort of teachers they will observe throughout the school year. Four cycles of observations will be scheduled where each supervisor will schedule ten observations monthly and APs will submit, by close of business day on Wednesdays a weekly check in log that will detail teacher observations, feedback sessions, and completion of observations on Advance, including instructional walk-throughs and PDs for each week. Throughout the school year differentiated PDs will be conducted based on Advance teacher observations for Domain 3. Teachers who demonstrated proficiency in planning and/or instruction will be asked to spearhead the professional development to build teacher capacity or hold class inter-visitations which will be supported and supervised by administration. In addition, all teachers will complete a Quality Scale Survey that will help administrators identify strengths, challenges and talents for individual teachers. The survey will be used to plan out the professional development given on Mondays based on teachers' needs, and/or interests. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will monitor student progress at every set interim benchmarks and conduct data conferences with teachers to adjust instruction. This will further impact student learning outcomes, resulting in 80% of all teachers receiving or sustaining Effective or Highly-Effective teacher rating in Domain 3, as measured by the Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Utilization with protocols reflecting questions applicable to curriculum outcomes. Grade Levels September 2018 – June 2019 PCTs, Principal, Assistant Principals, teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Peer Collaborative Teachers, Teachers, Assistant Principals Principal Professional Development in Domain 3 will focus on designing lessons and instruction that: Teachers  will fully intellectually engage students in learning using appropriate scaffolds  will advance students mastery in that content area  will aid to instruction appropriate to the learning needs of the students  will require students to immerse in discussions that will demonstrate degree of learning, misconceptions and precise use of academic vocabulary in context  will organize instructional groups such as guided reading groups to support student learning  will use exit slips to track and monitor lesson objectives and learning targets  will produce clear and sequenced lessons and unit structures Grade leaders will turnkey information from vertical team meetings to their colleagues during grade, common planning time. Teachers Students with disabilities and English Language Learners will receive targeted instruction based upon their current needs. SWDs and ELLS September 2018 – June 2019 (3x/month) September 2018 – June 2019 SWDs and ELLs will be exposed to on grade level CCSS by teachers incorporating appropriate scaffolds and setting multiple entry points on lesson plans. A series of professional development will be offered and crafted based on teacher needs aligned to Domain 3. The PD will further support teachers on writing learning targets that are purposeful and measurable in developing learning activities that are aligned to the lesson objective and formative assessments. As a result, Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Teachers acting as facilitators Special Education teachers, ESL Teachers, Individual Education Plan (IEP) teacher, Special Education ..... (SETSS)provider Principal, Assistant Principals 0 this will help teachers make immediate adjustments to secure student learning outcomes. Administrators will participate in professional learning, provide professional development, and continue to provide actionable feedback individually, as well as in both vertical and horizontal team meetings. This will be based on quarterly analysis of Advance teacher observations. Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent night - September and May; monthly PTA meetings; monthly SLT meetings; monthly classroom celebrations; parent workshops facilitated by pedagogical staff; parent coordinator events; father's day breakfast; mother's day breakfast, and school trips. Classes for parents on Saturday mornings, will commence in November. Our ELL popluation of parents will be provided English classes from a licensed ENL teacher, and will attend parent workshops to learn how to better help their children succeed in school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To achieve this goal, the prep schedule will now provide classroom teachers in the lower grades one common prep weekly to be utilized for classroom inter-visitations, common planning and/or grade meetings. In the upper grades 3-5, the prep schedule will afford classroom teachers two common preps weekly to do the same, but since these are testing grades and demands are higher, teachers meet with more frequency. Schedule facilitator to lead teacher rounds, Peer Collaborative Teachers (PCT) to lead professional development during Monday and Tuesday afternoons, administrators and/or highly effective teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress toward the implementation of action steps will be monitored weekly at supervisory cabinet meetings, as per AP weekly check-in logs. In December, administrators will have completed at a minimum two classroom observations per teacher and will hold mid-year conferences to discuss improvement of instructional practices and discuss data from interim benchmarks. Quarterly cycles on Advance will be analyzed to track and monitor teacher observations, feedback and impact of feedback given by administrators as follows: December 2018 30% of teachers will have attained an effective or highly effective rating. 1  March 2019, 30% of teachers will have attained an effective or highly effective rating. June 2019, 25% of teachers will have attained an effective or highly effective rating. A End of Year Conference will be held to revisit MOTP findings for the year, discuss data for each interim benchmark measuring student overall progress, and to set goals for the following school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. All informal and formal teacher observations will be closely monitored on Domain 3 in ADVANCE, using the Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on attendance data recorded during the school year, an average of 10% of the parent population attend school functions such as PTA meetings and parent workshops. 15% of the parent population attended the multicultural show. Parents attend classroom celebrations and assembly programs monthly. We celebrate fathers with an annual father's day breakfast and a mother's day brunch. The school provides monthly, parent workshops and PTA meetings covering a multitude of relevant topics. Our priority need is to find ways to increase the percentage of parent involvement in the school community, overall. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in parent attendance at school events and workshops as measured by the parent attendance log comparing 2017-2018 to 2018-2019 school year. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Create a parent survey to gather information on the types of workshops parents would be interested in attending. The parent coordinator will organize and lead these workshops. Topics covered will include instructional workshops, family events and parent association meetings as is evidenced by attendance records. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents September 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, Assistant Principal Teachers will use parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons to provide workshops including but not exclusive to the CCLS, homework help, NYS assessments. Attendance records will be maintained school-wide. Parents Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 School activities including family events and workshops that address students needs including SWDs and ENLs will occur monthly. Attendance records will be taken and maintained school-wide. Parents of SWDs and ELLs September 2018 – June 2019 There is regular communication with parents through school messenger, as well as daily conversations between teachers and parents. Records of contact are maintained by teachers and administrators, daily. Parents September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers of SWDs and ENLs, guidance counselor, SETTS provider, Parent Coordinator, PTA Principal, Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Queens Community House Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To achieve parent involvement in our school, we will use Tuesday afternoon engagement time, school messenger, parent coordinator, partnership with Queens Community House, PTA meetings, classroom celebrations, and multicultural show. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 4  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in parent attendance at school-wide celebrations, events, and functions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The specific instrument of measure that will show an increase in parent involvement for our school, is taking parent attendance during all events, and maintaining a parent attendance log. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day. Students will be set-up in cohorts that will meet with AISteacher twice a week for 45 minutes each session. During these meeting one session will be allotted to Math and the other to ELA. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who were at the cusps of 3 on the New York State ELATest Mathematics Students that were at the cusp of a 3 on the New York State Math test. An online program called Compass Learning will be utilized as the AISprogram. This will be delivered by the designated AISteacher. This program was RTIcertified by the City of New York. The program has baseline, formative and summativeassessments. Throughout the program the students will be getting instructions through online activities. Monthly, weekly or even daily reports can be printed to see students growth. These reports will also be given to the classroom teacher so that they can continue the program during small group work in their classroom. This continual tracking will also let us know if students need one-to-one intervention. The program also has an extended option for home use to further encourage student growth. An online program called Compass Learning will be utilized as theAISprogram. This will be delivered by the designatedAISteacher. This program wasRTIcertified by the City of New York. During the school day. Students will be set-up in cohorts that will meet withAISteacher twice a week for 45 minutes each session. During 6  Science Students who did not pass unit exams and grade 4 students who did not meet grade level state standards. Social Studies Unit exams these meeting one session will be allotted to Math and the other toELA. During the school day During the school day Whole-small-whole group instruction, peer collaboration, teachers working with students to provide Tier II small group intervention to remediate and support student understanding of science concepts. Whole-small-whole group instruction, peer collaboration, teachers working with students to provide Tier II small group intervention to remediate and support student understanding of social studies concepts. Theprogram has baseline, formative andsummativeassessments. Throughout the program the students will be getting instructions through online activities. Monthly, weekly or even daily reports can be printed to see students growth. These reports will also be given to the classroom teacherso that they can continue the program during small group work in their classroom. This continual tracking will also let us know if students need one-to-one intervention. The program also has an extended option for home use to further encourage student growth. Science teachers instruct utilizing a hands-on approach to instruction in order to foster exploration and collaboration for learning. Science concepts are extended to literacy, writing and math instruction in the classrooms. Classroom teachers provide Tier II instructional support by incorporating small group work utilizing Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Social Studies materials. Social Studies is incorporated into the Literacy block in guided reading groups. Primary and secondary sources are used during literacy to support learning. Hands on project based learning opportunities are made available. 7  Teacher referral, anecdotal records. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Small group, one-to-one, and individual sessions During school days. Services are provided by the guidance counselor for a number of times per week or month depending on the child's needs. These services are providedin the form of games, play therapy, puppets, role playing and counseling. At risk services are also provided by our school psychologist through counseling, play therapy, art therapy, and active listening sessions. Services are also provided by our social worker through one-to-one counseling. All are dependent on individual children's needs. 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 24 students Uniforms Parent Workshops Counseling Services as needed Free Bussing General Support School supplies: notebooks, loose leaf paper, pencils, folders; etc. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All staff members are highly qualified and are properly certified to teach in their respective positions. Through continuous Professional Development addressed towards topics currently in place (such as Danielson) as well as providing Professional Development on new additions to the curriculum (McGraw Hill Wonders Literacy Program), we are able to ensure the continued success of our staff at the highly qualified level. When recruiting teachers for positions we select candidates whose qualifications and certifications match our vacancies. If a current staff member wishes to change their position within the building we ensure that their certification matches the position into which they would like to change. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Monday afternoons are used for professional development and an opportunity to share ‘best practices” as well as common planning. Professional Development is created based on the needs of the staff and aligns with the CCLS as well as the Danielson Framework. An inquiry approach to analyzing student work will be incorporated into professional development sessions. Through examination of authentic student work, teachers will be able to assess not only the strengths and weaknesses of students but will also be able to modify instructional practices to best suit students' needs. Specific practices that will be put in place include but are not limited to teacher rounds, intervisitations, curriculum mapping, and best practices for implementing our new literacy program (McGraw Hill Wonders.) Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 1  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Parents are invited to attend numerous workshops outlining the CCLS as well as guidelines for preparing their children for the more rigorous demands at the elementary school level. Both the Social Worker and Parent Coordinator work closely with our pre-K population to ensure that both the children and parents are well prepared for the transition to the elementary level. Our school hospital clinic provides workshops on health and wellness for the children and parents as well. The Assistant Principal provides parents with information on how to best get prepared for Kindergarten.The Pre-K social worker observes students and works with the teacher to determine the social and emotional needs of each child. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers and administrators on the Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) team meet to discuss the various options available for assessment needs. Decisions are made based on the needs of the students as well as the materials and resources available within the building. Teacher teams meet weekly to discuss ongoing assessment needs. Professional Development is provided to staff members in administering assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 2  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local school allocation amounts) 457,202.00 85,822.00 38,734.00 0 5,549,344.00 Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5D, 5E Section 4A Section 5D n/a Section 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 3   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) PS 86 establishes the school’s expectations for parent involvement in compliance with Section 1118 of Title 1, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, and Section1118 of Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). This policy is the outcome of joint development and collaboration between school leaders and the parents and community of PS 86. PS 86 is creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. All parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Teacher Association, and Title I Parent Team, as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy is designed based upon careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parental involvement policy to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through parent surveys, checklists, and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of the parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. 5  PS 86 Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  Providing reading materials, various resources, and weekly, intensive training to help parents better assist their children improve their achievement levels through;  literacy, math, and technology parents workshops throughout the year;  Providing parents with information and training to ensure the involvement of parents in planning and decision making to support their children’s education by;  Parent workshops, tutorials, trips, and conferences.  Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to encourage parents to effectively support and monitor their child’s progress through the following activities;  Parent engagement (Tuesday Extended Time)   Parent Training/Parent Coordinator Family Nights  Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State, and Federal standards and assessments; SLT discussions/meetings Lead Teacher Meetings    ENL Parental Orientations/Meetings  Sharing information, to the extent feasible and appropriate, taking the following actions to ensure that information related to the school and parent programs, meetings, and other activities is sent to the parents of the participating children in a language parents understand;  Translators  Translation and Interpretation Unit 6   Organizing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills, and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; SLT   PTA  Parent Engagement Extended Time (Tuesdays)  Parent Workshops/Conferences  Web-based Learning (Technology Teacher, Webinars)  Site Staff Development Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or PTA), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  Actively involved and engaged parents in the planning, review, and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School- Parent Compact; SLT   PTA  Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  Parent Engagement Extended Time (Tuesdays) SLT   PTA  Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School Parent Compact;  Academic/Craft Workshops  Multi-cultural Celebration   Parent Appreciation Day International Dinner  Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or PTA), and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially developing leadership skills;  Web-based Learning (Technology Teacher Tutorial)  Parent Training/Parent Coordinator  Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person), to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents/guardians of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents/guardians. The Parent Coordinator will also 7  maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office;  English Language classes for parents Lending Library in multiple languages  Sewing Classes  Student uniforms   Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, assessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; SLT Lead teacher workshops  Parent Coordinator    Cluster Teacher Workshops for parents  ENL Workshops for parents  Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ‘Every Student Succeeds Act’ (ESSA) formerly known as ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review report, Learning Environment Survey Report, and LAP.; SLT   Parent Engagement Extended Time (Tuesdays)  PTA  ENL Orientations/Meetings  Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions;  Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  Translation and Interpretation unit  Translators  Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their students’ academic skill needs and what parents can do to help.  Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  Holding educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership teams, Parent Association (or PTA) and Title I Parent Committee; Supporting or hosting Family Day events;   Establishing a Parent Resources Center/area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; 8   Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  Providing school planners /folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 86 Queens, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the ESSA, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and families. Staff and parents of student participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standard on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standard to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standard and Assessments by:  Using academic learning time efficiently;  Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences;   Offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  Using rigorous and coherent curricula in all subject areas to ensure that all students including ELLs and SWDs Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; are engaged in learning.  Provide instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying the parents as required by the Every Student succeeds Act/formerly ESSA; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by;  Conducting parent teacher conferences each semester during which the individuals child’s achievement will be discussed as well as this compact is related;  Convening an Annual Title I parent meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their rights to be involved;  Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting;  Respecting the rights of families of ELLs to receive translated documents and interpretations services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent home to  parents of participating children in a format and in a language parents can comprehend; Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parents Involvement Policy and this Compact;  Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School- Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. 9 I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Provide reasonable access to staff by:  Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with parent of English Language Learners;  Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with the child’s teacher or other school staff member.  Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  Planning activities with parents during the school year, e.g., parent-teacher conferences, parent extended time, and during SLT meetings. Provide general support to parents by; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  Creating a safe, supportive, and effective learning community for students and a welcoming, respectful environment for parents and guardians;  Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor  their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled that the majority of parents can attend); Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy;  Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act, formerly known as ESSA, requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. II. Parent- Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  Ensure that my child comes to school rested, by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age;  Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks when necessary;  Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);   Promote positive use of extra-curricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; sports, and/or family quality time;  Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;  Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  Participate as appropriate in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district;  Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;  Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or state Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible;  Take part in the school’s Parent Association or PTA or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parents Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; 0    Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities  Attend school regularly and arrive on time;  Complete my homework and submit all my assignments on time; Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions;  Show respect for myself, other people and property;   Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully;  Always try my best to learn. 1 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: *Rationale: PS 86 will conduct an after school and Saturday Academy Program for English as a new language students (ENLs) for Grades 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. . The focus of the programs will be on expansion of conceptualized vocabulary, structure and syntax. The program will address literacy skills in the content area of science and social studies to promote student use of language and thinking skills. The data indicates that ELLs tend to master listening and speaking before they master reading and writing. Reading, considered to be one of the receptive aspects of language and writing, considered to be one of the expressive aspects remain a challenge for our students. This is a clear indicator that there is a need to increase explicit ESL instruction throughout the grade levels to provide ELLs with the tools necessary to navigate the language through deep structure, text patterns and genre so that the ELLs will be better equipped to navigate language through persuasion, editorializing, debating and the other supra segmental features of the language correctly. In desegregating the data, one can see that the challenge arises once the students have to read and write on their own. It is significant that most of the ELLs in this category fall in the middle indicating a need to broaden the language teaching to challenge and push our ELLs ahead through scaffolding strategies that will help them navigate the L2. The purpose of these programs are for the development of academic English language in content areas of science and social studies. The teachers will focus on various content based skills to help the students build English academic vocabulary and strategies they need in order to succeed in school. The teachers are linking the Common Core Learning Standards to the ENL program by concentrating on academic vocabulary and also applying ENL strategies to scaffold content instruction. In addition to the NYSESLAT review, the students will be immersed in reading non-fiction using Content Reading science and social studies books by Continental Press. Teachers will support academic vocabulary instruction using graphic organizers (ex. Frayer Model) clarifying language stems, text structures, and honing student reading comprehension skills in the content areas. Listening and Speaking will be emphasized throughout the lessons as well, with an emphasis on accountable talk. Students will practice listening comprehension and vocabulary through the genre of non fiction to improve comprehension using the RAZ Kids online program. *Subgroups and grade level of students to be served: The subgroups to be served are Ells , ELL-SWDS and former Ells in grades 1-5. *Schedule and Duration: The programs will begin the week of November 15, 2018 and will run for a total of 20 sessions. There will be a total of 10 classes in which 5 will be held on Saturdays from 9:00a.m. - 12:00p.m. Another Five(5) classes will be held after school on Wednesday and Thursday from 2:20-4:20p.m. The schedule of the day for the after school program will be as follow: 2:20-2:30p.m. Discussion of Essential Question and Language Goals 2:30-2:50p.m. Vocabulary Development 2:50-3:15p.m . Shared Reading/ Text Structures 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 3:15-3:45p.m. Guided Reading/ Close Reading 3:45-4:15p.m. Informative/ Opinion Writing 4:15-4:20p.m. Review and Dismissal The schedule of the day for the Saturday Academy will be as follow: 9:00-9:15a.m. Discussion of Essential Question and Language Objectives 9:15- 9:35a.m. Vocabulary development 9:35-10:05a.m. Shared Reading/ Text Structures 10:05-10:40a.m. Guided Reading/ Close Reading 10:40-11:30a.m. Informative/ Opinion Writing 11:30-12:00p.m. Technology-Razz kids/ Dismissal *Language of Instruction: The language of instruction will be English *Number and types of certified Teachers: All mandated ENL students are taught by certified/licensed ENL teachers. There will be ten (10) certified ESL Common Branch Teachers *Types of Materials: The materials to be used are: · · · science and social studies New York Content Reading workbook By Continental Press grades 2-5 Reading for Comprehension Readiness grade 1 Access to technology (Rolling Laptops)- student will conduct research in the content area rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: *Professional Development Rationale In order for the students to receive effective instruction , the teachers will participate in a number of Professional Development sessions during extended day on Mondays. The PLC topics include ,but are not limited to: · · · · · · · The Assistant Principal and ENL Coordinator, Yvonne Jetter will provide professional development days for all ENL teachers (Lisa Keenan, Ronni Mayo, Nicole Cotilletta) during the teachers' extended time on Monday afternoons, ESL Professional development for the entire staff, 3-4 times throughout the year. ENL teachers will also attend the city wide professional development days, and through our district EILI calendar days. Appropriate ENL strategies, vocabulary development, deeper and critical thinking, and scaffolding techniques will be Questioning and Discussion Techniques Analyzing NYSESLAT&nbsp;Data Assessments (pre, during, and post)&nbsp;&nbsp; Close Reading Structures of Guided Reading Vocabulary Language Development Writing in the Content Area &nbsp; 4  Part C: Professional Development reinforced in order to be implemented with their students. Accountable talk, 'think, pair, jot, share', and shared discussions, will take the place of turn and talks. Also, the co-teaching methodology of teaching will be reinforced throughout our school with inter-class/grade inter visitations across the grades. Every teacher needs to know what is happening in other grades and classrooms, with a focus on ENL teaching and learning. We will be supporting this work providing coverage and debriefing sessions to maximize our learning capacity. We practice a 90% ENL push-in model for our students where the ENL teachers push-in for mandated services. Also, small group pull-outs are sometimes necessary and beneficial for the Entering and Emerging students. The general education teachers are also provided with strategies for scaffolding various subject matter lessons for the English as a new language students. P.S. 86 has several classroom teachers who are also certified as ENL teachers. Teachers are using their PD time to align the curriculum and work together in order to plan and articulate for ELLs. The ENL teachers meet once a week with the general education teachers of the classes that they push into in order to debrief, discuss students, and plan lessons. During this time they discuss and plan strategies and lessons with vocabulary words and terminology based on the theme and unit of the month that will be taught during the upcoming week/month. Holistically throughout the day, whether before, during, or after school, methodologies are discussed with the focus on improving teacher and student performance. The Five ENL Title 3 after school teachers know the students very well, and are able to attend to their individual needs as necessary. Collaboration of the ENL teachers and the classroom teachers is encouraged and debriefings regarding their students' progress is ongoing. Knowing the students and meeting their needs based on their assessments and performance levels, is paramount. The PD participants will be looking closely at the Danielson Domain 3; components 3b, Questioning and Discussion, to deepen student understanding, as well as 3C, Engaging students in learning, and 3D, Using Assessment in Instruction. The impact of professional development will be to improve learning outcome for ELLs. ENL students will be able to formulate hypotheses, make connections, and practice their oral and written responses. Students' responses to questions are valued; teachers will be especially adept at responding to and building on student responses as well as making use of their ideas. Student's schema will be cultivated and analyzed by the ENL and classroom teachers, each step of the way. Pd agendas, professional development handouts and records of students attendance in the program will be documented in a Title III binder. 10% of the funds will cover our professional development plan; per session and basic supplies. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: *Rationale: In order for ELLs to succeed and achieve higher academic standards we include parents as partners in their children's education. P.S. 86 engage parents in workshops and opportunities to participate in the school community and in their child's education. 5  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities In order for the parents of ELL learners to become effective members of their new English speaking community, they must also learn to speak English. By having a basic understanding of English they will be able to better apt to help their children assimilate into the English speaking culture. Traditionally, the parents and families of the P.S. 86 community have looked forward to our parent English classes, that are free to them. We envision continuing the classes this scholastic year using the Title lll percentage of parent involvement. We will be hiring a certified ENL Teacher for the parents. They will practice conversational English, as well as practice writing using their workbook, and pencils that will be provided for the parents. Parents will gather an understanding of every day vocabulary, and basic grammar to improve overall language acquisition. A permission slip will go out to all the parents (including Pre-K parents), and selected on a first to submit basis. A walking trip through the community culminates their lessons at the end of the program, weather permitting. The teacher will be conducting ENL parent classes on Saturday from 9:00a.m. to 12:00p.m for 20 session. The parents are very excited and anticipate these parent classes each year; it is wonderful that we are able to provide this opportunity for them. *Schedule and Duration: The Parent Saturday Academy will consist of three (3) hours (9:00a.m to 12:00p.m.) and will begin November 10, 2018 and continue for twenty(20) sessions. The schedule is as follow: 9:00 - 9:30a.m. Conversational English 9:30-10:00a.m. Reading skills 10:00-10:30a.m. Writing skills 10:30- 11:30a.m. Technology (Navigating the DOE Website, Power point, Words, etc.) 11:30a.m.- 12:00p.m. Community Outreach *Topics to be covered: · · · · · explanation of websites so that parents can access their child's school information--testing, attendance, progress report, and so forth) · they pertain to their children. (Testing Accommodations for ELLs, testing requirements, NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, Science, ELE). -- the promotional criteria (standards) impacting on the ELL population. --the NYSESLAT Parents' Progress Report *Name of Providers: R. Rivera, Principal; J. Crespo, Assistant Principal; S. Bennett, Parent Coordinator; Y. Jetter, ENL Teacher *How Parents will be notified of theses activities: · (English/Spanish/Bengali). · · English/Spanish/Bengali). · · services will be acquired if necessary.&nbsp; 10% of the funds will cover parental involvement; basic supplies, workbooks, and per session for the ENL certified teacher. Navigating&nbsp;the DOE website- resources for parents Math and Literacy workshops Bridging parent-school partnership Unpacking the CCSS&nbsp; Parent link (parents are invited to the computer room, given an access code and Phone calls prior to meetings and activities. Flyer's advertising the event written in English, Spanish and Bengali. Translations &nbsp;The new format of standardized testing for New York State and the regulations as Parents will be notified via letters sent to their homes in their home language Monthly school calendar which is translated to their home language. Bulletin boards at the entrance of the building (information displayed in 6 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name PS 86Q. Borough Queens School Number 086 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Rosita Rivera Coach Yamileth Calderon ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Yvonne Jetter/ENL Coordinator Teacher/Subject Area Lisa Keenan/ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Ronni Mayo/ENL Teacher Related-Service Provider Teresa Jackson/IEP Teacher Superintendent Mabel Sarduy Assistant Principal Jacqueline Crespo Coach Nazreen Ghafoerkhan /Staff Dev School Counselor Barbara Korzekwinski Parent Glenda Santos Parent Coordinator Selphia Bennett Field Support Center Staff Member Lindsey Eckersall/ Speech Teac Other (Name and Title) Nicole Cotilletta/ENL Teacer C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 8 0 3 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 8 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 8  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 855 Total number of ELLs 239 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 27.95% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 4 K 1 2 Spanish 2018-19 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 2 0 0 2 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 86Q uses various tools to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. According to MOSL assessment choices for this year, we have chosen to assess all students using Teachers College (TC) running records for the baseline. Teachers use this reliable reading assessment tool in order to identify students' reading progress and create intervention decisions based on the result. These results help teachers make informal decisions about each child's oral reading skills, analyze their comprehension of a text, and determine their appropriate reading levels. Also, reading behaviors are indicated throughout the assessment such as substitutions of a word in a text, omissions or insertions of a word. Teachers take note of mispronunciation of words, self-corrections, miscues which may include meaning, structure or visual errors. Ultimately, this assessment tool helps the teachers at P.S. 86 effectively place students in reading groups, and helps them to guide further literacy instruction as well as use the 9  reading errors to adjust literacy instruction. Teachers continuously assess throughout the year, utilizing RAZ Kids and Pre/Post Reading and Writing Unit assessments . After the results of each assessment is retrieved, the ENL teachers use the instructional recommendations to make the effective adjustments to meet each students' learning needs and provide actionable and meaningful responses regarding student achievement. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? P.S. 86Q has many structures in place to support the use of formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments that are used to guide instructional planning for our ELLs. This year at P.S. 86, all of the teachers received professional development from both Peer Collaborative teachers on Danielson Framework 3d in order to support the use of formative assessments and curriculum embedded assessments to guide their instructional planning. During the Professional Learning Community, teachers participated in various group activities to effectively assess, analyze, and monitor their teaching and learning practices using multiple lenses. In addition, weekly grade level meetings were held to ensure that the aforementioned assessments were implemented in each grade level curriculum, and revisions were made to adjust classroom instruction accordingly. Lastly, all classroom teachers participated in Inquiry work where they assessed student's work to enhance their phonemic awareness and instructed them how to pull details from a text to give support to the Main Idea. Additionally, some grades used specific word problem strategies to help build students' comprehension skills. Some of the strategies utilized were: read the problem aloud, circle the numbers, search for key words and drawing out the problem. In addition, P.S. 86 have implemented RTI periods in order to provide targeted systematic intervention which would focused on students individual needs. Also, the groups are small, no more than 6 students in each group in order to build reading skills. All ENL and classroom teachers provide RTI intervention on Tuesdays and Thursday for 1 period. This affords the teacher the opportunity to give the students the support and the tier learning so they can reach their full potential. During the RTI periods teachers work on guided reading, word work, Fundations, sight words, phonics and phonemic awareness. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? P.S. 86Q ensures that all students are engaged in rigorous and coherent curricula in all subjects that are accessible to a variety of learners and are aligned to common core learning standards. The school employs various learning programs, such as Wonders and Compass Learning, to ensure that these goals and standards are met. We evaluate our successes by discussing and looking at what works and what doesn't work using our data. Through our Monday afternoons , the ENL teachers and classroom teachers are mastering a collaboration of ideas, practices, and continuous discussion of how to achieve student growth. Our teachers meet once a week to discuss the trends and noticing of student work. These discussions and analysis of students also occurs during the PPT meetings in order to address the needs of the ELLS and SWDs and provide AIS services which has decreased the number of referrals. The teachers make decisions on our next steps of instruction especially for our ELLs and SWD. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? There are many structures that are in place to address interventions in the Wonders, and Compass Learning Programs. Once the summative data has been gathered, PS 86Q uses Wonders combined with the Common Core curriculum to target specific areas of difficulty ie: phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, and vocabulary. All students in grades K-5 received small group (Tier 1) instruction from their classroom and (Tier 2) from ENL and Cluster teachers through guided reading groups where they focused on the areas of difficulty and helped to improve their academic language. In order to increase comprehensible input, the ENL teachers used context-embedded language, differentiated instruction, and explicit instruction. The RTI Tier 2 instruction is given twice a week for one period of 50 minutes. Through Wonders the ENL students received intervention instruction which provided students who did not develop critical reading skills. This instruction was guided by specific interventions that focused on one or more key areas of reading development. Reading Wonders Adaptive Learning is used by ENL teachers to model the target skills, provide an opportunity for student practice and demonstration of mastery as well as remedial as needed. Upon mastery of any skill, students are advanced to lessons on his/her challenge level. The ENL teachers monitor student progress through the reporting views and provide direct instruction as needed using the provided recommendations. 0  In the dual language program where Spanish is used, teacher use Fountas & Pinnell and Estrellita to identify student progress in the Spanish language. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 86Q uses data from the NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, Science tests, Teachers College Running Records, GoMath Assessments, Wonders benchmark assessments, RazKids, and BrainPOP as well as many teacher created assessments throughout the year. The data is used to regularly and frequently assess whether students are making adequate progress. The teachers also use the data from these assessment to form groups based on the abilities of their students. Many teachers use these assessments to create rigorous goals for their students as well. Additional progress is monitored regularly to ensure that students are benefiting from the interventions and meeting the goals which teachers created for them. This enables the ENL teachers the opportunity to determine if the results are based on second language issues or if other interventions may be necessary. Ultimately, less ENL students will be referred to special education. The data is also used to provide RTI Tier 1 and Tier 2 instruction in the classroom. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. When looking at the data patterns across proficiency levels and grades on the NYSITELL ,NYSESLAT and EDAT it was noticed that the areas of speaking and listening were significantly higher than the areas of reading and writing. This pattern of proficiency indicates that P.S. 86 needs to increase the focus on the reading and writing aspects of language acquisition. Our focus this year is the reading and writing connection coupled with vocabulary development. Whether during math, science or social studies and/or literacy block, all students will create vocabulary booklets as well as interactive word walls and begin to use the words, definitions and multiple meanings in their writing activities. P.S. 86 is also using a school wide Frayer model to increase vocabulary acquisition. Teachers will group students according to their abilities in literacy in order to be able to focus on the academic needs of each individual child. Students will also be assessed on an ongoing basis both formally and informally to ensure that progress is being made.The pre/post assessment tests are fairly accurate indications of the skills that need to be remediated in order for ELLs to reach proficiency in the English Language Arts. Native Language is used to help children acquire the background knowledge that is necessary to comprehend the educational tasks that are required. We have noticed that students are coming to this country less educated in their native language than they have in the past. This includes our Spanish, Arabic, Bengali, Urdu and Punjabi speaking students whose parents confirm our findings through interviews. The ramifications of having students with little to no education in their native language is that the ENL teachers are focusing more on basic literacy skills for ELLs at the Entering and Emerging levels in order to have them prepared to follow the grade's curriculum. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? PS 86Q has many structures in place to disseminate the aforementioned findings which assists our ENL staff to make adjustments to our ELL program. The ENL teachers co-plan with classroom teachers, collaborate with classroom teachers during grade level meetings, attend as well as provide professional development and meet with parents during "parent time" on Tuesdays. During co-planning, the ENL administrator and ENL teachers discuss findings/patterns and noticings of our ELL population and work with the classroom teachers to create multiple entry points within the lessons. Activities within the classroom are structured to support student-to-student and group interaction which increases ELLs English Language production and affords them to explain concepts and contribute to classroom discussions. Informative assessments are used to correct use of language structures and academic vocabulary. When ELLs have difficulty with phrases or vocabulary, teachers offer guidance or further instruction to support language development. Part IV: ELL Programming 1  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. When the child's test falls below the cut score on the NYSITELL, they are placed in ENL as an Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, or Expanding student. Based on the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT score, the Entering students will receive 2 units of study per week (360 minutes) where 1 unit of study (180 minutes) is done using the Stand-alone ENL model and 1 unit of study (180 minutes) is done using the Integrated ENL model in ELA. The Emerging student will receive 2 units of study per week (360 minutes) where the ENL student receives .5 units of study in ENL (90 minutes) using the Stand-alone model and 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (180 min.) using the Integrated ENL model. The Emerging student will receive .5 units of study in either Stand-alone ENL or Integrated ENL/Content Area (90 minutes) which will be determined by needs of the ENL student and flexibility of scheduling. The Transitioning student will receive 1 unit of study per week (180 minutes) where the ENL student will receive .5 units of study in Integrated ENL/ELA (90 minutes). The Transitioning student will receive .5 units of study will using either the Stand-alone ENL model or Integrated ENL/Content Area (90 minutes) model which will be be determined by the needs of the ENL students and flexibility of scheduling. The Expanding student will receive 1 unit of study per week (180 minutes) where 1 unit of study (180 min.)will be given in ENL/ELA or other Core Content Area using the Integrated ENL model. Commanding students, or former ELLs, receive .5 units of study in Integrated ENL/Core Content Areas for two additional years after proficiency is reached ion the NYSESLAT. Students are grouped and instruction is planned based on the students' ENL level and the number of minutes required. b. TBE program. If applicable. At this time PS 86Q does not have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. Currently, P.S. 86 has one Dual Language kindergarten and one Dual Language first grade class where both English and Spanish are taught to the students, simultaneously. Each language is taught 50% of the time in the class. The Dual Language teacher evaluates the students based on their listening and cognitive progress and their receptive language is evaluated as well. Some tools used to monitor student progress in English proficiency is Raz-kids A-Z, TC running records, Estrellita, a beginning Spanish reading program, as well as Maravillas, the Wonders Spanish translation. The program model is one day English and one day Spanish. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? When the child's test score falls below the cut score on the NYSITELL, they are placed in ENL as an Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, or Expanding student. The Entering students will receive 2 units of study per week (360 minutes) where 1 unit of study (180 minutes) is done using the Stand-alone ENL model and 1 unit of study (180 minutes) is done using the Integrated ENL model in ELA. The Emerging student will receive 2 units of study per week (360 minutes) where the ENL student receives .5 units of study in ENL (90 minutes) using the Stand-alone model and 1 unit of study (180 min.) in ENL/ELA using the Integrated ENL model. The Emerging student will receive .5 units of study in either Stand-alone ENL or Integrated ENL/Content Area (90 minutes) which will be determined by needs of the ENL student and flexibility of scheduling. The Transitioning student will receive 1 unit of study per week (180 minutes) where the ENL student will receive .5 units of study in ENL/ELA (90 minutes). The Transitioning student will receive .5 units of study using either the Stand-alone ENL model or Integrated ENL/Content Area (90 minutes) model which will be be determined by the needs of the ENL students and flexibility of scheduling. The Expanding student will receive 1 unit of study per week (180 minutes) where 1 unit of study (180 min.) will be given in ENL/ELA or other Core Content Areas. Commanding students, or former ELLs, will receive services for an additional two years, through .5 units per week of Integrated ENL in ELA/Core Content Areas. 2  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The school employs the Go Math program as a math curriculum. This program is aligned to the common core learning standards for math. The program is used for K through 5 and provides opportunities for student success at all levels. For example, there is an enrichment component for students that have mastered a specific concept and re-teaching opportunities for those that require more practice and instruction to master a concept. A significant part of the school's focus on meeting CCLS for literacy is the Wonders curriculum that is used for grade 5. The program is a comprehensive English Language Arts curriculum that uses organized texts and routine based instruction. It promotes student thinking and understanding by citation of text-based evidence, which is a key component of CCLS. The students are able to build on prior knowledge as each lesson provides a foundation for the next step. The program is a cross-curricular program that integrates science and social studies text, which is a key foundation of the CCLS whose expectations require students to master non-fiction text and cite text evidence to support their ideas. At PS 86Q grades K through 1 use the Wonders program "Maravillas" in Spanish. The programs that the school uses for math and ELA for all grade levels are aligned to the core curriculum. The framework provided in these school curricula provides academic tasks that emphasize rigorous habits across all grades and subjects including ELLs and SWD. These programs are tiered so that all students can meet the challenges of rigorous academic tasks. The phonics component of Wonders for grades K through 5 is one way that ELL and SWD can build their fluency so that they can master text comprehension and succeed at academic tasks that meet CCLS. There is also an ENL component in the Wonders program that is used by ENL teachers when they push into the classes. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? After the students receive the NYSITELL, a determination is made to see if they are eligible for ENL services. Those students who are Hispanic and fall below the cut score on the NYSITELL receive the Spanish Lab to evaluate their native language proficiency. In the Dual Language classroom, Ells are evaluated in their home language using the Estrellitas (phonics) benchmark, Maravillas (Wonders), literacy unit assessments, and running records (F & P in Spanish). Through these assessments, the teacher is able to monitor each individual student's progress and drive instruction to further meet their academic needs. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for ELLs depending on the status of where they fall within certain subgroups. For children who fall under the SIFE heading, RTI instruction is given twice a week. Also, the ENL and classroom teachers continually reinforce new concepts and language in academic instruction and integrate concepts across content areas. In order to make standards and curriculum accessible to SIFEs, ENL and classroom teachers adapt standards -based lessons so they can cover the most important information in a way that students can attain full comprehension. Students who are in a U.S. school for less than 3 years are invited to the Saturday Academy immigrant program for three hours where they were immersed in basic English language skills to accelerate the English language acquisition. They received increased exposure to the English language by use of phrases, using visual representation of new vocabulary, linking new information to prior knowledge, modifying vocabulary instruction and providing comprehensible input. In addition, students who have recently entered the country receive ENL services four periods a week (Newcomer Program) in addition, to their mandated minutes . AIS services are provided to all ELL subgroups three periods per week. Students who participate in this program are provided with test readiness strategies. Item analysis of students testing data has been reviewed and is used to drive and differentiate instruction. RTI (Tier 1) and (Tier 2)services are provided to long term and former ELLs to provide them with interventions at an 3  increased level of intensity in order to accelerate their rate of learning. Instruction for RTI is modified until it meets the needs of all learners. For students who have received ELL services for four to six years, benchmark assessments in both Math and ELA are used to assess levels of students. Programs including Raz-kids and Teacher's College running records are used to track student progress as well as periodic assessment results. Parents are encouraged to take their children to the library and read with them on a regular basis in English and in their native language. Writing rubrics are created by the teacher and the students for each assignment in order to promote accountability and ownership for the writing piece. Students in the ICT and self-contained special education classes who are English Language Learners receive ENL services according to their Individual Education Plan (IEPs). All children who have not reached English proficiency take the NYSESLAT in the spring. Transitioning and Expanding ENL students in grades 1 through 5 were offered an ENL after school program. The after school program was conducted twice a week for two hours and the students received test taking and test readiness skills. The ENL teachers used strategies to support both content and language development. The Former ELLs receives AIS services using The COMPASS Learning Program. In order to provide differentiated instruction for all ELL subgroups, the ENL staff at PS 86Q made content comprehensible for all students by providing ELLs with alternative ways of accessing key content (ie: charts, simplified text written by the teacher, discussions, sentence starters, visual aides, etc.) The ENL staff also uses on-going assessments to guide instruction, flexible grouping to match students with different peers for different types of activities, and collaborate with other teachers to provide successful instruction. These strategies are used to support the needs of all ELLs with varied backgrounds and needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? P.S. 86Q ensures that all students are engaged in rigorous and coherent curricula in all subjects that are accessible to a variety of learners and are aligned to common core learning standards. The school employs various learning programs to ensure that these goals and standards are met. We evaluate our successes by discussing and looking at what works and what doesn't work using our data. Utilizing assessments, the ENL teachers assess the ELLs, review the data, and use the prescribed interventions for each individual child's profile in order to increase student growth. Through our inquiry work, we are mastering a collaboration of ideas, practices, and continuous discussion of how to achieve student growth. Our inquiry teams meet once a week to discuss the trends and noticing of student work. The ENL teachers uses a variety of graphic organizer and the focus was to assist students to not only organize their writing but to add details to their writing pieces. Student work at the Expanding level was analyzed at the inquiry meetings and the teachers used this input to further drive instruction and meet the goal(s) that were created. The teachers made decisions on next steps of instruction especially for ELLs and SWDs. The ENL teachers at P.S. 86Q used Wonders because it offers an intervention instruction which provided students who have not developed critical reading skills. This instruction is guided by specific interventions that focused on one or more key areas of reading development. Reading Wonders Adaptive Learning was used by ENL teachers to model the targeted skills, provide an opportunity for student practice and demonstration of mastery as well as remedial as needed. Upon mastery of any skill students are advanced to lessons on his/her challenge level. The ENL teachers monitor student progress through the reporting views and provide direct instruction as needed using the provided recommendations. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In order to help ELLs-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment, students are grouped according to their goals on the IEP. These students are also placed in ICT classes where two teachers plus the ENL teacher assist with English language proficiency which allows for a lower student to teacher ratio. The co- teaching methods are used by all teachers in order to share the planning, organization, delivery and assessment of instruction. This allows an ease of scheduling flexibility since the ENL teacher can push into the classroom and aid in the instruction without a disturbance of the teacher's schedule. Instead all teachers work together to teach in an intense and individualized manner. Teachers will learn from each others expertise and expand the scope of their teaching capacity. It also reduces negative stigma associated with pull-out programs . Students with disabilities may feel more connected with their peer groups. 4  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We attempt to offer a variety of intervention programs for our ELLs in ELA, math and all other content areas. Intervention is given through the differentiation of instruction during the specific subject area classes throughout the day. Teachers group children according to a specific need for targeted small group instruction in Math, Literacy, Social Studies, and Science as well as providing writing partners. Services offered include Academic Intervention Services (AIS) which was given by ENL and classroom teachers, service providers and an F-status teacher and were offered within the parameters of the school day. Also, at risk pull-out services were provided as needed by the IEP teacher. The school also offers the services of Counseling, Speech, Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy and Adaptive Physical Education. All ELLs in grades 1-5 are afforded the opportunity to participate in an ENL Afterschool program where they receive extra help in literacy and math. The students are grouped according to proficiency level. The ENL teachers deliver intensive explicit instruction in reading, writing, listening and speaking. This intervention will help them to develop English language proficiency. AIS services are provided to all ELL subgroups. Students who participate in this program are provided with test readiness strategies. Item analysis of students testing data has been reviewed and is used to drive and differentiate instruction. Instructional materials used to support ELLs include Raz-kids, curriculum focused manipulatives, a Science Lab, a Computer Lab, Smart Board/Promethean Board accessibility, curriculum centers and Tier Task grouping. The classroom teacher as well as support staff on a daily basis provide language support for ENL students. In the explicit ENL programs, the CCLS and accompanying Performance Indicators provide the framework for instruction. A workshop model of balanced literacy is being implemented with relevant scaffolding strategies in both reading and writing. The Expanding level ELL students receive one unit of ENL and also receive one unit of ELA instruction which is provided in the general classroom. ENL teachers collaboratively plan with the classroom teachers for alignment of instruction. In accordance with the new CCLS, students are supported in instruction through the design of questions aligned with Charlotte Danielson’s questioning techniques that are age appropriate and demonstrate rigor. The school also offers RTI intervention instruction twice a week on Tuesdays and Thursdays for 1 period of 50 minutes. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have a Bengali speaking ENL teacher to assist our tremendous Bengali population. This has afforded us to assist the Bengali community more efficiently with translations, orientations, and to better understand their cultural needs. For the 2018/2019 school year, P.S. 86Q will have a Kindergarten self contained class which will be taught by a Bengali speaking ENL teacher in order to support our growing Bengali population. This will aid in English language development and help to support native language. The Translations and Interpretations Division enabled us to have closer communication with our parents in their native languages. For this year, we have assisted our immigrant population with an After school and Saturday Academy Program to assist them to acquire English Language acquisition. Four ENL teachers worked with grades 1-5 and helped them acquire beginning language skills in listening, reading, writing and speaking. The students were immersed in basic English language skills to accelerate English language acquisition. They received increased exposure to English through he use of phrases, visual representation of new vocabulary, linking new information to prior knowledge, modifying vocabulary instruction, and providing comprehensible input. Additionally, the Parent Academy on Saturdays provides parents' with ENL classes to improve English language skills. The Parent Coordinator, Ms. Bennett, holds regularly scheduled academic and craft workshops for all parents to participate in. The academic workshops pertain to math, reading, science, and provide tips or suggestions on how to help their child(ren) succeed at school. The crafting workshops teach parents sewing, pattern making, floral arrangements, jewelry making, and crocheting. Parents are also invited to volunteer to assist in the set up of workshops or to lead the workshops if they have a talent to showcase. Our Parent Coordinator also organizes and holds a yearly multicultural show for the parents and all students in grades K through 5 are invited to participate. The children display a variety of cultural fashion, dancing, poems, and speeches. These community outreach activities will continue throughout the upcoming school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 5  We had No TB programs in the school. We are fortunate to be able to continue all of our previous ENL and DL programs. We have improved upon them through the teaching and learning of content and language acquisition. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Every opportunity is given to provide equal access for all ELL students. Through interdisciplinary created lessons and programs, such as music and theatre arts, ELL students actively participate in after school and supplemental services. For example, the ELLs in grades K through 2 are instructed using musical instruments such as the conga drum and guitar. For the second year, P.S. 86Q was awarded a $16,000 grant and the Tada Arts program worked with 2nd grade students to integrate theater arts, social studies, and writing for ELLs and SWDs. The Tada Arts program took place two times per week and the culminating activity was written by the students and performed for parents and staff members. Throughout the day, the ELLs are immersed in oral and language development through arts through the content area as well. The after school ENL Title 3 Program, on Wednesdays and Thursdays, gives the ELLs more academic and language support. The Parent Coordinator organizes a yearly Multicultural show for the parents to attend and all students in grades K through 5 are invited to participate. The show consists of fashion, dancing, speeches and poems. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Entering, Emerging, and Transitional students receive phonemic support through the Wonders Program. The ENL teachers are all trained and use the Wonders program to better assist students with phonemic awareness. Students also develop their fluency, vocabulary, and their writing skills. In order to meet the differentiated needs of the Expanding and Commanding students, the ENL teachers encourage more discussion and oral presentations through the use of content knowledge and language skills. The ENL teachers use technology via Smart Boards/Promethean Boards to incorporate Picture Theme Mosaics and videos in lessons in order to front load concepts and stimulate thinking/connections to prior knowledge. Personal experiences are shared to create a picture of concepts and ideas within the lesson in order to better bridge student understanding. Using the push-in model, the ENL teachers follow the Common Core Curriculum using Wonders and GO MATH with the English Language Learners in the classroom. In order to supplement these programs, many ENL teachers use Wonders, Raz-kids, Pearson Language Central ELD, Pathways to Writing, Enchanted Learning and many others to assist in giving the ELLs a diverse learning experience that is rich in language. Instructional materials used to support ELLs include BRAINPOP, Raz-kids, and curriculum focused manipulatives, a Science Lab, a Computer Lab, Smart /Promethean Board accessibility, curriculum centers and task grouping. The ENL teachers at P.S. 86Q use Wonders because it offers an intervention instruction which is provided to students who have not developed critical reading skills. This instruction is guided by specific interventions that focuses on one or more key areas of reading development. Reading Wonders Adaptive Learning is used by ENL teachers to model the target skills, provide an opportunity for student practice and demonstration of mastery as well as remedial as needed. Upon mastery of any skill students are advanced to lesson on his/her challenge level. The ENL teachers monitor student progress through the reporting views and provide direct instruction as needed using the provided recommendations. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? There are many ways that the ENL teachers deliver home language support to ELLs within the classroom. A print-rich environment which includes access to books and reference materials, labels, posters, and student work displayed on bulletin boards. Word walls, both personal and classroom displayed, are used as a great support for ELLs. They are organized around a number of concepts, including the alphabet and phonetic sounds, new vocabulary words, sight words, grammar rules, conversational phrases, and writing structures. For Native language support, science and social studies native language thematic book baskets are being utilized in the classrooms. In the explicit ENL programs, the CCSS and accompanying Performance Indicators provide the framework for instruction. Also, the teachers at P.S. 86 assign language buddies within their classrooms who help the student stay on task and give them a sense of security especially since that child usually speaks the same language. Bilingual dictionaries are also used to assist with word to word translations. These are numerous ways the ENL teachers support language acquistion for the ELLs and in the process, get them on the road to academic success. In the Dual Language classroom, a number of home language support assessments are used. Estrellita is a beginning Spanish 6  reading program that provides phonics benchmarks, Maravillas is the Spanish translation to the Wonders program and provides unit assessments, and additionally Raz-kids A-Z is used for reading level assessments and to monitor progress for each students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL teachers support the classroom teachers and learning by using the many co-teaching models (parallel teaching, station teaching, alternative teaching, team teaching, One teach, One Observe and One Teach, One Assist.) The ENL teacher uses ENL skills and strategies to scaffold the material being taught as well as front loading the vocabulary of the lesson. Also, the ENL teacher integrates language skills within the content in order to give them practice of the language function which they are focused on. Many ENL teachers also use language frames in order to give the ENL students a structured technique for using the academic language being taught in the classroom. Books were purchased and are in the classroom which are age appropriate as well as leveled. The ENL students are grouped both according to grade and NYSESLAT or NYSITELL level. These and many other strategies are used to ensure that the required services support, and resources correspond to ELLS' ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 86 does not share a building 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At this time, P.S. 86Q does not offer any activities prior to the beginning of the school year. However, once the student is enrolled or those newly enrolled ELLs who register throughout the school year are invited to participate in many programs. P.S. 86Q offers a host of activities and programs to its ELL population throughout the year. These include an ENL Afterschool Program two times a week for four hours. Queens Community House, a community school-based organization, also helps many of our ELLs with their homework, and offers academic and social programming during vacations throughout the scholastic year. P.S. 86 Q also offers newly enrolled immigrants an opportunity to acquire beginner English language acquisition through a Saturday Academy Immigrant Program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? : At this time P.S. 86Q does not offer any language electives to any of the students in the school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently, we are using the self-contained dual language model in Spanish. The ELLs and EPs are integrated 100% of the day. Every content area, ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies are all taught in both languages, Students receive 50% of their instructional time in English and the other 50% in Spanish. One day the teacher teaches in English solely, all content areas and the next day instruction is solely taught n Spanish, all content areas. Language is separated by day and core content area is taught in both languages. 7  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ENL teachers will attend professional development throughout the year as the opportunity arises and is provided, in/out of school. The school will conduct a survey of staff to determine who is in need of 7.5 hours of ENL training as per Jose P. ENL teachers will participate in inter visitations of two 45 minute class sessions to view a co-teaching lesson as part of the 7.5 hours of ELL training required. Additional ways to achieve the 7.5 hours will include UFT training sessions, on-line course work, and meetings with an ELL consultant. Our assistant principal and ENL teachers at P.S. 86Q offer various professional development to the entire staff as well as the ENL self-contain classroom teachers to support the ELLs as they engage in Common Core Learning Standards. Co-teaching classroom teachers with ENL teachers, will be intervisiting other co-teaching /ENL classrooms for best practices. We will begin these intervisitations November 2018. Because of these inter visitations, classroom teachers will be able to see first hand, how the co-teaching model and ENL strategies are implemented to almost perfection while using the common core curriculum through the Common Core.org curriculum, Wonders and Go Math. The aforementioned professional development sessions are all inclusive and will support all teachers in delivering common core-aligned instruction. The professional development sessions will afford all teachers of ELLs the opportunity to build upon prior knowledge, scaffold and improve upon established schemata. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. This scholastic year, our professional development requirements of 15% of total hours for all teachers, will be fulfilled through ongoing ENL PD, and intervisitations by grade. Additionally, in order to meet the 50% of total hours for ENL teachers, we will utilize out Title 3 PD funding to focus on best practices for co-teaching and integrating content and language instruction for English Language Learners. Records of all professional development activities are maintained by agendas and attendance. Also, the ENL teachers turnkey vital information to the classroom teachers to further assist with ENL language acquisition. The professional development monthly sessions will encompass all areas of needs specified by the teachers of ELLs. October29, 2018, writing learning targets and language objectives, November 6, 2018, Strategies for peer editing and learning to use a rubric as a teaching tool. December 11, 2018, How to use diagnostic tools and formative assessment practices to measure ELLs content knowledge. January, 8, 2019, Building a common language and understanding of the ENL Service models (Stand-alone ENL and Integrated ENL). February 5, 2019, The benefits of Collaboration and Co-teaching. March 5, 2019, Instructional moves to support ELLs. April 16, 2019, Sharing best practices in the ENL classroom. As a result of the yearly professional development sessions, all teacher of ELLs will be well-informed, better prepared, and collectively elevate the instruction and academic achievement of ELLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annual individual meetings with the parents of ELLs are provided to discuss goals of the ENL program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language needs in all content areas. During the Tuesday parental involvement extra time, ENL teachers along with the classroom teachers, communicate with parents regarding academic performance, behavior, attendance, and suggestions of moving students to the next level. We are fortunate to have many staff members that can translate in Bengali, Spanish, and Arabic during these meetings. Parents are also afforded the 8  opportunity to participate in weekly parent workshops with our parent coordinator, Mrs. Bennett. These workshops harness and help create the social, emotional development for the parents of ELLs and create a connection between home and school. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Annual individual meetings with ELL parents are recorded and filed. Data is stored and maintained in files with the classroom and ENL teachers. The four ENL teachers, Yvonne Jetter, Ronni Mayo, Lisa Keenan, and Nicole Cotilletta, provide outreach to parents through phone calls and letters home (translated), are documented, and kept in a central location within the ENL office. One of the things that we are most proud of that fosters parental involvement for parents of ELLs at P.S. 86 is that we provide an English tutorial class. This affords our non-English speaking parents the opportunity to be in a class setting with an ENL teacher, Ms. Kupferberg, learning English as a second language. We provide them with notebooks, texts, pencils, and the ENL teacher. The attendance is consistently good, and they are active learners. The parent coordinator offers many classes for the ENL parents such as parenting skills, sewing, crafts, and crocheting. The parent coordinator along with the PTA conducts a yearly talent/fashion show which highlights the various cultures of our ENL school community. The parent room is set up with many computers that are purposely arranged and exclusively used by the ENL parents. Instruction on the use of the computers and how to navigate the Department of Education website, as well as word processing, letter writing, and Internet usage, is offered to ENL parents in the school. Monthly workshops are offered by the math coach and ENL teachers in how ENL parents can best help their child in areas as homework, math, literacy, and test taking skills. The PTA invites the ENL parents to regular scheduled meetings. All parents are provided with the calendar of the month with all the dates and events happening in our school at the beginning of the year and each month thereafter. P.S. 86 has a school based clinic with a nurse practitioner who speaks Spanish, French, and Haitian Creole. The nurse practitioner holds meetings with ENL parents concerning the health and nutritional needs of their children. All families are invited and encouraged to sign their children up with the clinic. Also, when funds are available, we organize and send parents on trips such as to The Metropolitan Museum of Art, paying for transportation, museum tour, and lunch. In order to accommodate a vast population of ENL parents, during all of the aforementioned activities, translation services are made available through parent to parent translation, ENL teachers readily available to assist with translations, and other staff members such as administrators, nurse practitioner, safety agent, and anyone else who speaks the language needed. Also, the Immigrants parents in the Saturday Academy are immersed in the American culture through a Parent Involvement trip which allowed the parents to visit the community. This outing is one way that P.S. 86Q is trying to bridge the gap between the Parents and the school. It also helped the ENL teachers build relationship with the parents in order to develop bond and share the culture of New York while learning about the individual culture of the parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. This year we have a DL program in the first grade. 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rosita Rivera, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 86 School DBN: 28Q086 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Rosita Rivera Title Principal Jacqueline Crespo Assistant Principal Selphia Bennett Parent Coordinator Yvonne Jetter ENL/Bilingual Teacher Glenda Santos Parent Ronni Mayo Lisa Keenan Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Nazreen Ghafoerkhan Yamileth Calderon Coach Coach Barbara Korezekwinski School Counselor Mabel Sarduy Dr. Martine Santos Nazreen Ghafoerkhan Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Director of English Language Learners Other Peer Collaborative teacher Nicole Cotiletta Other ENL Teacher Teresa Jackson Other IEP Teacher Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/25/18 10/25/18 10/25/18 10/25/18 10/25/18 10/25/18 10/25/18 10/25/18 10/25/18 10/25/18 10/25/18 10/25/18 10/25/18 10/25/18 10/25/18 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 28Q086 School Name: PS 86 Superintendent: Mabel Sarduy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jacqueline Crespo AP No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 86Q uses a variety of ways to assess the effectiveness of our written translation and oral interpretation needs. The administration and staff of P.S. 86Q use the following data from ATS:  HLIS o RCPL  RAPL o RADL o These ATS report are used to identify the primary languages needed for translation. Also, all critical documents are translated accordingly and the translation stamp is used when necessary. Mrs. Bennett, our Parent Coordinator, provides extensive surveys at the beginning of the school year and throughout to identify/address the needs of the parents. P.S. 86Q ensures that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in their language of preference. ENL teachers are fluent in Spanish and Bengali who are available for translations when necessary. 2  Parent volunteers are available for translations as well. Based on our parent interviews during registration, LAP report, and HLIS forms, we can conclude what our language needs are and then form a plan of action. o Currently the three most languages spoken at the school are English, Spanish and Bengali. Notices and letters that are sent home are translated (front to back copies) and have the translation stamp as well. On site, we have one Bengali ENL teacher as well as two Bengali speaking paraprofessionals who assist with translation and interpretation for the large Bengali population in our school. We also have one Arabic speaking paraprofessional as well. o Teachers make appointments with parents/guardians using the Department's Translation and Interpretation Unit phone service in order to assist parents with the language barrier. The assistant principals have phones in their offices for these appointments. This seems to work for us very well, and we continue to use the Translation and Interpretation Unit phone services, whenever necessary. Also, upon review of the emergency parent contact cards, language needs are address as needed. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral With a lot of current as well as a large influx of incoming Bengali students, we noticed the need to communicate effectively with the parents/guardians especially when enrolling their children for the first time in a NYC public school. The ENL Benagli teacher assists the parent coordinator with written translation and oral interpretation needs in order to help and reach out to Benagali speaking parents. The parent volunteers and Bengali speaking paraprofessioanals assist with these school needs. We have had parents translate our letters and notices in the Bengali language, with the assistance of our Bengali paras. Our findings were reported to the school community by the parent coordinator, as well as school administration during monthly Parent Teacher meetings. 3  ARABIC BENGALI CHINESE FRENCH HATIAN CREOLE Afrikaans MANDINKA (AKA MANDINGO) MALINKE MANDARIN ENGLISH PASHTO PHILIPINO PUNJABI SPANISH URDU UKRANIAN 36 244 5 2 1 1 2 0 0 470 0 1 4 269 16 1 3.42 23.2 .47 .19 .09 .09 .19 0 0 45 0 .09 .38 25.5 1.52 .09 38 258 4 2 1 0 2 0 1 459 0 1 5 264 17 1 3.6 24.5 .38 .19 .09 0 0 0 .09 44 0 .09 .48 25 1.6 .09 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Every letter that goes out to our parents is translated in Spanish and Bengali. The language translation stamp is also placed on every letter that goes home to the parents and guardians. Examples of letters are: Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. P.S. 86Q uses a variety of methods to translate letters in a timely manner so that the parents are aware of all the activities and programs that will benefit their child's academic performance. A list of staff members 4  monthly newsletters, announcements for upcoming celebrations, assemblies, and events, invitations to events, before/after school ENL programs being offered, NYS testing dates, trip slips and permission slips, and reminder letters of important dates. Cell phone/Electronic Device Policy Family Night Welcome to the New school Year Peanut Free School closed for Eid al Adha Family Night Lending Library Rosh Hashanah Fall Parent/Teacher Conferences half day letter Book Fair Parent/teacher Conferences (PTC) Title I Meeting Uniform Notice Columbus Day School Closure September October including their Native Language is stored in the office, ENL teacher's classroom and Assistant Principal's office as a reminder of the translators that are available for use throughout the year. Also, P.S. 86Q uses the Translation and Interpretation Unit and/or Language stamp for those Languages that are not readily available at P.S. 86Q. This process is used for all of the letter that will be distributed to the families throughout the school year. In addition, funding is allocated to address language assistance need by using Doe vendors and use bilingual staff per session rates activities outside their regular working hours at their regular contracted rate. 5  Title I funds Parent Association Meeting Notice PBIS Spirit Week Parent Newsletter Go Math Academy Parent Teacher Conference Staff and Teacher locations Winter Recess District 28 Middle school Application Information Session 4th and 5th Grade Winter Concert Picture Day Notice Winter Recess Letter Picture Day Reminder Letter December Calendar Parent Newsletter Science Letter November December PBIS Spirit Week Immigration and Student Education Letter January Parent Newsletter Parent Craft Club Valentines Day Sale AIS and ELL After School Programs Cancellation Letter February Spring Parent Teacher Conference/Half day Letter Parent Workshop School Community Involvement Letter Parent Survey Notice March 6  Multicultural Show March Newsletter April Newsletter NYS ELA and Math test Notice Letter Annual Science Fair Letter Pre-K Registration/last day Letter Non-Instructional Day Letter P. S. 86Q Title I Letter Kindergarten Musical Performance Letter Pre-K Non Attendance Day cancelled April Fidget spinners Notice Letter POS System for lunch Letter Parent Newsletter Water testing Letter Middle School Decision Letter May Newsletter Mother's Day Sale Letter PBIS Walk-A-thon Letter Mother's Day Breakfast May Calendar May Parent Association Meeting Letter PTA Meeting Letter Curriculum Articulation/meet the Teacher Night Letter 7  Peace Around the World International Night Letter Articulation and Music Night Letter Parent Workshop: Helping Your child Listen Letter Memorial day School Closure Letter TADA performances Letter Pre-k Stepping Up Ceremony Letter Kindergarten Moving Up Ceremony PTA Meeting half Day Notice Letter Summer Reading Skills program Letter Half Day and School Closure Letter June June Calendar Half day Notice Letter TADA Performances Letter Eid Sl Fitr School Closure Letter 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? P.S. 86Q has many opportunities throughout the year for the parents to interact with the staff members, face-to face individually and holistically. In September, we have 'Meet the Teacher Night' where the teachers including all ENL and clusters, review curriculum and expectations for their children. In November, March and in May, we have our parent teacher conferences where over 90% of our parents attend. On 8  Tuesday afternoons, we have 40 minutes extra time for parent engagement where the classroom teachers prepare parent development such as lessons for the parents. For example,"How to help your child at home with homework", "Phonemic/phonological awareness for their children" and "Successful strategies for NYS testing", to name a few. Also, Classroom celebrations, assemblies, science fair, book fair, and field day events are a way to involve our parents with their children's education. The guidance counselor and assistant principals have ongoing meetings with parents on a weekly basis to address concerns and to create plans for particular students, as needed. The attendance officer is always referenced and makes those house calls to students with excessive lateness/absences. Meet The Teacher Night Parent Teacher Conferences (PTC) (11/15/18-11/16/19) Parent teacher Conferences (PTC) 5/23/19 Parent Engagement (meets every Tuesday) Translation are provided by the classroom teachers, ENL teachers, paraprofessional and hired translators through the Translation and Interpretation Unit. (same as above) (same as above) (same as above) ENL Parent Orientations as needed throughout the school year (same as above) 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency at school, the staff ensures that every child including LEP families are reached. The blue emergency cards are handed out to every student at the beginning of the school year to gather pertinent information about each child which can be used in the case of an emergency. Next, the emergency cards are copied and filed in 9  the main office, copied and placed in a binder within the office for use by all staff. Every classroom teacher has a copy of the blue emergency card in each child's cumulative folder along with class lists and ROCLs to make sure that accurate information is readily available in the case of an emergency. Assistant Principals have a binder of blue emergency cards, class list and ROCLs as well. The Assistant Principals have the Translation and Interpretation Unit number programmed into their cell phones to make sure that they have quick access to translators in all languages The ENL teachers have a MASTER LIST which includes pertinent information of the ELLs that they are working with and access to the emergency cards within the classrooms that they are pushing into. The BRT team organizes and directs the schools in drills to better prepare the staff for a real life emergency. The aforementioned information is readily available so that P.S 86Q can reach limited English proficient families in the event of an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The language access coordinator main responsibility is to facilitate the provision of language access services. The LAC coordinator holds a staff meeting at the beginning of the year during Monday's professional development to make sure that everyone in the school is aware of his/ her obligations with respect to providing language access and assisting LEP parents. The meeting consist of the resources available to staff and how to improve communication with LEP parents. Language access kit Language Identification Guide    Translation Request Form   Access to intranet templates  Over-the-phone Interpretation Services  On-Site Interpretation Services List of Bilingual staff members available and language spoken Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Here at P.S. 86, we follow the Chancellor's Regulations A-663 in a variety of ways. The LAC Coordinator work with school staff to create an environment in which parents are aware of and understand how to access services, and provide direct outreach to parents about their rights to language assistance services.  The parent welcome poster is posted at the primary entrance of the school.  Post signs regarding visitors access in covered languages to ensure that parents are not prevented from reaching the office due to language barriers  Parents' are informed of their right to and the availability of languages services by sharing a copy of the parents' Bill of Rights and/or Parents' Guide To language access and by posting a sign such as the multilingual Welcome Poster indicating the availability of interpretation services. 0   Parents/guardians are contacted by the teachers once all registration requirements are met and the    student(s) are assigned to a class. Appointments are given to all parents in a timely fashion whether written or oral, to come in and speak to any staff members such as teachers, guidance counselors, school nurse, and administration, about their child's education or any other critical information they need to know. Staffing resources and translators are utilized during parent teacher conferences where we hire translators in various languages to assist the teachers in communicating with the parents/guardians. Depending on budgetary availability, these translators (EX. Paraprofessionals) are paid to translate for our parents/guardians. Also, registration and applications are translated in Spanish using standard text. The NYC Discipline Code Book is translated as well, and is coupled by our discipline assemblies to adhere to conduct and discipline education. A translated letter to the parents/guardians goes home to explain the importance of the child following the discipline code of conduct, whereby a slip returns to the teacher reporting that the parent signed after reading through the booklet with their child. Since we have a school based clinic in our building, our nurse practitioner assists our parents/guardians with almost every need. She speaks English, Spanish and French. Nica Mompremiere advocates for our parents/guardians and is a big part of our scholastic community. She is well known and the parents/guardians trust and value her expertise as she translates (written/oral) and interprets important information whether medical, academic, and/or social/emotional. Ms. Nica translates letters and makes phone calls home on a daily basis as needed. Special education letters are translated and sent home, followed by a phone call and follow up as necessary, until we acquire our desired result of parental meeting, entitlement, or placement. Meetings with teachers and/or the school based support team are conducted with lots of language support. ENL notices from the Department of Education website are used which are already written in the native language of the parents/guardians. These letters and notices to parents/guardians inform them of continued eligibility of services. The translation stamp is always placed on every document for the parents/guardians requiring them to attain assistance translating and interpreting information about their child. Our guidance counselor, Mrs. Korzekwinski, and our parent coordinator, Mrs. Bennett, continuously inform the parents/guardians of Citywide ELL parent meetings, Citywide/Community Education Council Meetings, and other Citywide parent meetings that are given.  Notification requirements are all posted and translated as needed. All language access services depending on the need, are provided to all parents as soon as they contact us, request help, and/or initiative measures of contact by school staff. The Department employees involved in assisting the parents/guardians with translation and interpretation services holistically are the ENL teachers, bilingual teachers, administration, paraprofessionals speaking Arabic, Bengali, and Spanish. Others included but not limited to are the parent coordinator, secretaries and even our security guard. These services whether by phone, in person, or phone translation unit, are provided on a daily, weekly, and monthly basis. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At the beginning of each calendar school year, the Parent Coordinator distributes surveys and checklists to identify parents interests, availability and feedback to better meet the individual needs of each family. When parents and guardians come and ask us for assistance, we immediately explain (with translation) what our services and programs are and how their children can benefit from them. We personally speak with the parents, inviting them in via parent workshops with the parent coordinator, during registration, and with the ENL teachers during parent ENL orientation sessions. When on-going feedback is given by the parents to the classroom teachers when a particular need arises, we immediately address the concerns and invite the parents in to explain the procedures and programs. 1 
