 26Q098 School Name: P.S. 098 THE DOUGLASTON SCHOOL Principal: LENA KIM   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The DouglastonSchool 26Q098 26Q098 K-5 School Number (DBN): 40-20 235 th Street Douglaston, NY 11363 718-423-8535 718-423-8550 Phone Number: Fax: RoseannCiaccio rciaccio@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Lena Kim Julius Adams Cecilia Venosta/Jennifer Genovese Lena Kim/ Cecilia Venosta/ Jennifer Genovese n/a n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 26 Danielle Giunta Superintendent: 61-15 Oceania Street, Bayside, NY 11364 Superintendent’s Office Address: dgiunta4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718.631.6943 Phone Number: 718.631.6996 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens Plaza North FSC: Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North Long Island City, New York 11101 Executive Director’s Email Address: lpender@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718.391.8222 Fax: 718.391.8320   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lena Kim Julius Adams Cecilia venosta/ Jennifer Genovese n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a TakbirBlake TeddKanakaris *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Michael Smirnoff Athena Stertsios Robert Leavy Pamela Kelly Jeannie Georgiou Amy Kuchynsky Frances Pinto Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement?   As a 2016 National Blue Ribbon School Program award winner, PS 98’s mission is to instill in every student the skills necessary to succeed academically, physically, socio-emotionally, and college and career ready in the 21st century. We believe every student possesses the capability to be self-disciplined, innovative and independent learners. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our curriculum and programs are, and will be, designed to support success based on individual aptitude and interests. PS 98 provides strong foundational skills based on STEAM (“Science, Technology, Engineering, Art and Mathematics”) philosophy and interdisciplinary curriculum. This approach provides our students with essential 21st century learning skills, namely: collaboration, communication, creativity and critical thinking through our instructional focus of the year. PS 98 students will actively engage in collaborative conversations that encourage the exchange of ideas, based on evidence that generates deeper and stronger understanding and new thinking across content areas. In order to fulfill this vision, PS 98 promotes a strong partnership between school and home, as well as with families, businesses and community-based organizations. The existence of a School Leadership Team, prior to its becoming the requirement of the DOE, is one of the many testaments of our strong connection between school and families. Our long standing reputation for excellence and collaborative work with the community at large is evident through the ongoing support of our PTA which has been consistently generous in subsidizing enrichment experiences for our children in art, science and technology. At PS 98, we strive to create a diverse and inclusive environment that values the experiences, perspectives and contributions of all students, families and faculty. As a result, we seek to foster an environment where individual differences among us are understood, respected and recognized as a source of strength that enriches our school. PS 98 endeavors a safe, nurturing and comfortable environment for our students and families. We value collaborative efforts between students, parents, teachers and the community. Good interpersonal relations are based on respect, sensitivity and trust. We believe in working together as a team (students, parents, staff and community) to promote a positive climate for learning. Coupled with Sanford Harmony, a social-emotional program designed to teach children about cooperation, empathy, and effective communication in our classrooms, PS 98 established the Ambassador's Club, Bucket Fillers program initiative based on the book, Have You Filled A Bucket Today? and Friday Shout-Outs. These initiatives foster the spirit of sharing, giving, caring and Friday Shout- Outs ig and helping. The Bucket Filler program encourages and recognizes our students who have made wise choices and contributed to a school climate that celebrates trustworthiness, citizenship, respect and caring. The student-led Ambassador's Club works to make a difference in the community and help people in need through philanthropic activities. Friday Shout-Outs highlights unsung heroes who make a difference in the lives of the community. School programs, activities and initiatives that our students are engaged in are designed to prepare our children to become leaders in the 21st century and are aligned with the STEAM philosophy. The programs, activities and initiatives include:  Next Generation Learning Standards aligned rigorous curriculum and instruction  Teacher’s College, Columbia University Writing Workshop Partnership  Blended Learning – Computer Based Literacy Programs 0   Metamorphosis partnership for the enriched math instruction  Amplify for hands-on science curriculum  Douglaston Wetland STEAM Project in collaboration with The Douglaston Manor Environment Association (DMEA)  Passport to Social Studies curriculum  Thinking Maps as a school-wide tool for learning  As an Thinking Maps Accredited School, students use Thinking Maps to organize and expand their high order thinking  Douglaston Clubs Enrichment Programs: Robotics, Web Design, School Newspaper, Literary Magazine, Math Olympiad, Stock Market Challenge, Reader's Club, Debate, Garden and Poetry  Chess Curriculum  Coding Instruction based on Code.org Curriculum  Midori CASA program  Theater Arts/ Chorus/ Musical Instruments (Recorder, Guitar and Keyboard)  Physical Education/ Move to Improve  After School Enrichment Programs: Sports, Cooking, Lego Club, Arts and Crafts, Minecraft Educational STEAMchess, Code Academy, Music and Theater, Broadway Musical, Yoga, Guitar Student Council Lunch Monitor's Club Joint Projects with the Douglaston-Little Neck Historical Society and the Douglaston Garden Club    The following school activities provide opportunities for parents to further develop their partnership and become part of the PS 98 family:  Fabulous Fridays (family members read their favorite story or text to their child’s class, thus fostering the love of literature) Zumba Wednesday Field Day Smart Word of the Day / Smart Song of the Month  Book Character Day  Book of the Month   Read-a-thon: Everyone Reads at PS 98  Vocabulary Day  Career Day  Math/ Game/Lego/Science Night  Quarterly Principal Coffee and Conversation  Quarterly School Newsletter  Parent Workshops on Various Topics    Earth Day Celebration  Welcome to PS 98 Tea (for new parents on the first day of school)  Curriculum Night (formerly known as Meet the Faculty/Staff Night)  Teacher Appreciation Luncheon  World Heritage Celebration  Bucket Fillers Breakfast  Health and Wellness Council  Parent Volunteers Recognition Assembly and Breakfast   District workshop hosted at the school  End of Year Celebration sponsored by the PTA   Parent Volunteer Recess Team School Messenger (call service to communicate with our families and staff) Social-Emotional Learning Council 1  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS 98 has an ICT class in every grade with diverse learning needs of IEP Students as well as ENL students who require enriched language support. Our school-wide utilization of Thinking Maps have been extremely effective and supportive of students with diverse learning needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Steady progress, especially with students with disabilities in the area of Rigorous Instruction. We need to improve in the area of Collaborative Teachers. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q098 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 289 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 12 8 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 22.0% % Attendance Rate 18.7% % Reduced Lunch 1.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 15.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 47.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.16 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 79.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 97% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A YES N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A NO N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 16 16 94.8% 2.8% 14.9% 4.5% 26.3% 5.5% 0 0% 7.7 80.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of our school's NYS ELA and Math Assessments, Quality Review, School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, Student Survey and TCRWP Running Records revealed the following findings:  As per the 2014-2015 Quality Review our school shows strength in curricular aligned teacher practices that are engaging and meeting the needs of all learners.  As per the 2014-2015 Quality Review our instructional core focus revealed coherent grading practices through all grades and the analysis of information on student learning outcomes.  As per the TCRWP Running Record Assessment for June 2017, 86% of the students met or exceeded grade level, 76% of students increased their independent level by 3 levels, and 83% of ICT students increased their independent read ling level by 3 levels.  As per the 2018 State Assessments, 79.7% of students are at proficient levels of 3 and 4 in ELA and 80.5% are in Math  As per the 2018 State Assessments, 64.2% of students with SWD are at proficient levels of 3 and 4 compared to 41.6% in 2017  As per the 2017 State Assessments, 74.5% of students are at proficient levels of 3 and 4 in ELA and 77.4% are in Math.  As per the 2016 Student Survey, students feel that their teachers care about them and that they are intellectually challenged. Students also revealed a desire for 1) more fun/engaging homework assignments 2) summary of the lesson outcomes.  As per the Spring 2017 School Student Survey, students are happy and feel that their teachers care about them. Students also stated that they are intellectually challenged and like hands-on project based learning. In order to facilitate a trend of improvement it is essential that students continue to move up in their independent reading levels. We will use the TCRWP Benchmark Reading Levels and Marking Period Assessments guide to measure student independent growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 4  By June 2019, at least 85% of students will increase in their independent reading level to a minimum of 3 levels including ELLs and SWDs as measured by TCRWP Running Records Assessment. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Implement research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: K-5 Teachers Sept -June Teacher Leaders Administration 2018-2019 Administrator   Infuse science and social studies curricula into the ELA curricula (cross curricular learning) Increase the amount of hands-on STEAM activities and EIE (Engineering is Elementary) experiments throughout the year (cross curricular learning)  Professional development for teachers regarding the best practices of infusing science and social studies into ELA  Professional development for teachers in Thinking Maps to utilize to support students in writing Implement strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups: K-5 Teachers Sept-June Teacher Leaders Administration 2018-2019 Administrator  Implement Socratic Seminars into units to promote listening, speaking and analytical thinking (provides additional entry points for students to demonstrate content knowledge)  Hands-on STEAM activities and EIE experiments naturally lend themselves to increased student engagement and different methods of learning for high-needs subgroups  Utilize Thinking Maps in all content areas to support and organize students' thinking  Utilize blended learning to support ENL and students with IEPs 6  Engage families and supporting their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home: K-5 Sept-June Teachers 2018-2019 Teachers, Staff, Parents and Students Administration  Parent workshops to address shift in increased cross-curricular learning, as well as the process of doing so Parent Leaders  Parent workshops for Socratic Seminars (purpose, process, benefits to learning)  Parent workshops for Thinking Maps (used by all teachers in all subject areas)  Parent workshops to share academic programs such as Fundations, Ampify and STEAM lessons. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through Principal Coffee and Conversations, parents will understand Rigorous Instruction, Next Generation Learning Standards, and school instructional initiatives. Parent/Family workshops and events will be conducted by staff and students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will maximize structured Monday Professional Development and Tuesday Professional Time to learn and grow in order to support our students' learning. Additional professional learning periods will be built in the weekly schedules. Classroom teachers will be scheduled with at least 3 common preps per week to facilitate the opportunity for common investigation and planning. Grants from the DoE initiatives, PTA and community organizations will be utilized in hiring outside professional developers and purchasing resources and materials. In addition, NYSTL monies will be a major source for the purchase of resources. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Teachers will administer and collect TCRWP assessment data at least 3 times (September, March and May) to analyze and share their benchmark assessment findings with administration and colleagues to discuss the implications of the data. 7   By March 2019, at least 75% of students including ELLs and SWDs will have made progress in their TCRWP running records to a minimum of 2 levels that demonstrates they are meeting the independent reading level goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) TCRWP Running Record Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? All students at PS 98 feel that their teachers and administrators care about them and provide nurturing environment. PS 98 strives to establish even stronger school culture and environment where students feel safe, comfortable, supported and challenged through initiating and continuing the following activities and programs:   Student Suggestion Box to fosters student voice Student-led programs to foster the spirit of helping, caring and giving: Ambassador's Club, Lunch Monitor Club, School Spirit Day, Friday Shout-Outs, and Student Council  Offer enrichment programming to create 21st Century learners through enhanced technology initiatives including rigorous instruction on coding, individual laptops for each child, and new smart-boards with latest interactive hands-on functionality  Teacher-led Extracurricular Activities where students collaborate across grade levels: School Newspaper, Literary Magazine, Web Design, Robotics, Garden Club, Debate, Math Olympiad, Stock Market Challenges and Math Olympiads  Teacher, Student and Parent Collaboration: Health and Wellness Council  The School-wide activities to engage the entire school community: Zumba Wednesday, Sing Our Monthly Vocabulary Songs, Read-a-thon, Book Character Day, World Heritage Celebration, Vocabulary Day  Bucket Filler Celebration: Encouraging students to practice good behavior and celebrate students who display exemplary character School-wide STEAM initiative partnering with the Douglaston community organization  Implement Sanford Harmony Program school-wide to support students' social and emotional well being  School-wide social-emotional activities and events to foster empathy, kindness, and collaboration.   Newly added Broadway Musical and Basketball Team after school program will foster our students' motivation, independence and confidence. Based on 2016-17 Framework for Great Schools Report, parent involvement in the school was 96% a 6% higher rating than the citywide average. 96% of parents were satisfied with outreach from teachers and school. Based on the school-wide 2017 Spring Student survey results, 21% of students who took the survey felt that they feel that sometimes they are not respected by their peers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 9  By June 2019, there will be 15% fewer conflicts during recess and unstructured time as measured by a school created incident report. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Principal will promote a collaborative, challenging and supportive student environment by: 1. Continuing and expanding After School Enrichment Program to accommodate the needs of the students and community PTA, Parent Coordinator, Administration, Class Parents, Parent Volunteers Parents/ Sept.-June Principal 2. Expanding Douglaston Club time to provide enrichment Students 2018-2019 and intervention across grade levels 3. continuing Principal Suggestion box for the students  Principal will maximize resources to continue and sustain a structure to support AIS services for struggling students  Principal will continue to implement a professional development survey for teachers to support and develop each teacher's professional strengths and needs  Teachers will identify students who they believe are in need of individual or small group support focus session to foster a culture of acceptance and respect.  Recruit parent volunteers to assist students and teachers in STEAM wetlands project. Principal social worker, psychologist, faculty and staff 1 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, social worker, psychologist, guidance counselor  Professional development will be provided for staff on K-5 Parents Sept.-June K-5 Sept.-June 2018-2019 2018-2019 “respect for all” and anti-bullying programming.  Parent and student workshops will be provided to familiarize the school community with new initiatives and how to support children at home.  Parents as partners, Lunch Recess Team – Parents will be lunch buddies to model, as well as mediate during lunch time and recess. Possibly will lead games, play with children who have no one to play with and encourage others to join, and assist with taking children to nurse and bathroom.  Classes will be paired up with a “buddy class” to foster  peer relationships in school. Students will have opportunities to work collaboratively with their “buddy” throughout the school year (peer mentoring). Special Persons Day – Children will choose a special person in their life, and during class write about that person. During a Special Persons Day they will share their writing at a class celebration.  Daddy Daughter and Mother Son Days – Fathers and daughters, mothers and sons have dinner dance.  Bucket Fillers – Our school will continue to participate in the Bucket Filler program, which recognizes children for positive in behaviors exhibited.  Workshops will be provided for staff and students on  anti-bullying and respect. Fathers support Group – Fathers have asked for a support group to discuss parenting issues and how to better support learning at home. This group will be established to support that effort.  World Heritage Celebration – This extended program will be revitalized as an expanded program dedicated to celebrating the differing cultures in our school. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Through Principal Coffee and Conversations, parents will understand Rigorous Instruction, Next Generation Learning Standards, ESSA Act, and school instructional initiatives. Parent/Family workshops and events will be conducted by staff and students. The SLT members and PTA members will play key roles supporting and sharing school's vision. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will capitalize on the district and support center professional development opportunities to support teachers' and parents' learning. Principal will utilize resources to continue to provide support environments for all students. Parent Coordinator to oversee the scheduling of parent workshops during day and evening. Use of Parent Coordinator stipend to provide refreshments for workshops or to purchase materials to support the workshop. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  School Social Emotional Teacher/Parent Team will design and collect baseline/ end of the year student surveys to collect and monitor student progress in the area of Social Emotional Learning using the NYS SEL benchmark standards  By February 2019, 100% of students will participate in the Sanford Harmony program and 75% of teachers will participate in Emotional Intelligence professional development. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey Responses Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  The rating of Proficient in the Quality Review 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development, was based on the greater need for inquiry-based teacher teams to analyze student work, observe trends and discuss implications for classroom practice and teaching strategies school wide.  Based on the analysis of Measures of Teacher Practice for 2017-18, 34% of the teachers were rated as highly effective.  Based on Teacher Reflection form, our professional development, teachers expressed that there should be an overall collaboration among teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will participate in collaborative action research teacher teams to analyze student writing using Thinking Maps and inform instructional decisions as evidenced in a 5% increase in student proficiency for all students including SWD and ELLs on both school level assessments and NYS assessments. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Administration will create a system and structure for K-5 Sept.-June Administration, 2018-2019 All Classroom Teachers and Paras teachers to meet at least once a month as a vertical team to share and plan for the cohesive curriculum and content.  Teachers will be provided with the opportunity to meet at least 4x a week as a grade team during common prep to plan and share what they learned from the professional development workshops in Literacy and Math.  Through the vertical study group and grade band group meetings, facilitated by teachers through monthly meetings, the teachers will continue to work in an atmosphere of mutual respect to better implement the product of their collaborations, research, and workshops into their teaching practice and curriculum in order to raise the level of student performance. All teachers will work collaboratively together when implementing a unit of study to better create cohesion between, and support for, classroom and other subject matter learning.  Through various PD and workshops teachers will participate in collaborative learning by meeting with grade teachers or grade band to discuss and implement strategies to further student progress.  Teachers and service providers will hold a collaborative K-5 Sept.-June meeting to discuss the SWDs development and assessment to provide the least appropriate services meeting individual needs prior to scheduling any parent meetings. Teachers and Service Providers will respectfully collaborate on setting goals appropriate for the student(s).  Teacher teams will develop unit plans that will utilize Thinking Maps, Fundations, TC Writing, Science Fusion, Algebra for All, Wetlands/APEC Project, Passport to Social Studies, CARP, and SEL as a tool for creating multiple entry points for ELLs, SWDs, and high achievers. 2018-2019 Administration, all teachers and paras All Service providers 5 K-5 Sept.-June Administration 2018-2019 All Classroom Teachers and Paras, All Service Providers  Teacher will foster open communication with parents throughout the year, via email, phone and scheduled conferences in addition to the designated parent engagement time. This will include school-wide monthly newsletters to inform how children are doing and what is happening within each grade.  Teachers and staff members will continue to conduct a series of parent workshops around school-wide initiatives, curriculum and instruction to support parents to help their children at home.  Grade leads who attended professional development workshops will share and turn-key their learning with grade partners. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through Principal Coffee and Conversations, parents will understand Rigorous Instruction, Common Core, and school instructional initiatives. Parent/Family workshops and events will be conducted by staff and students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To meet these goals the faculty and staff will maximize common preps, Monday PD and Tuesday Meeting time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, 100% of the teachers will successfully complete one collaborative study group cycle that demonstrates evidence of student progress in their student work data.. Through grade band meetings and PDs, teachers will collaborate their practices to better support student learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 6  Teacher Led Professional Development Workshops and Collaborative Inquiry Team Meetings can be measured by feedback, reflection sheets, and student inquiry data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Historically PS 98 is an academically high achieving school, but it can do even better. The school leader has a vision to improve and strengthen the quality of our already rigorous instruction by building the capacity of teachers and staff members. Research has shown that in order to create and sustain a great school, leaders must engage in on-going capacity building. Leaders need to provide systematic opportunities and support for teachers and staff to grow. In turn, this will ensure that every student will learn, grow and develop the skills needed to become productive, caring and critical thinking global citizens. The PS 98 school leader has already begun this work and plans to deepen and expand consistent and systematic support for teachers and staff. Since the 2015-2016 school year, PS 98 started building teacher leadership capacity through collaborative inquiry teamwork. Through the analysis of student, teacher and parent surveys, informal/formal assessment results and student work it was revealed that the increase in student achievement was largely due to improvement in teacher leadership. During the 2017-2018 school year, 85% of teachers have had opportunity to engage in a leadership role by leading:  Professional development sessions in the areas of Thinking Maps, STEAM/Science, Algebra for All, and Social-Emotional Learning grade band collaborative inquiry teams in the areas of writing  Demo lessons and inter-visitations to share best practices in the areas of STEAM, Thinking Maps, Social- Emotional Learning, and informational writing in Science/STEAM. Student extracurricular activities in the areas of School-Wide Zumba, Student Councils, Student Volunteers, and Clubs  Parent engagement in the areas of School-Wide Health and Wellness events, Book of the Month, parent workshops, World Heritage Celebration and other special events According to the 2017-2018 Teacher Reflection and Survey results, teachers value learning from their colleagues in their respective grade bands in addition to school-wide learning opportunities or learning from experts. 8  The 2017-2018 School Quality Report survey revealed that the teachers need improvement in collaborative teamwork and more cohesiveness in professional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as teachers expand their leadership roles, there will be an increase of 0.5 points in the average component rating for Danielson 4e as measured by Advance. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  The administration will support teachers to identify their All teachers Sept.-June Administration strengths, areas of interests and experience to take responsibilities as teacher leaders.  The administration will review and study school data to identify the needs of the school and the areas where teacher leaders could emerge.  The administration will provide structured opportunities for teachers to collaboratively analyze and utilize collected student assessment data to drive instruction.  The administration will continue to expand and deepen the utilization of Thinking Maps as a school-wide language for learning by having teacher facilitators providing workshops and actionable feedback so that all students are using the maps as a tool for organizing and expanding their higher-order thinking.  Grade leads will receive professional development sessions focused on implementing a rigorous common core writing and math curriculum then turn-key to grade colleagues  The administration will support the team leaders on the inquiry- based action research process with the implementation school-wide initiatives such as Thinking Maps, Algebra for All, Computer Science and Science/ STEAM.  The administration will support the Book of the Month Teacher Team to develop and craft school-wide questions that facilitate robust collaborative conversations and higher-order thinking skills.  The administration, in collaboration with the Professional Learning Committee, will plan differentiated professional development workshops for teachers that will focus on how to effectively facilitate rigorous instruction that provides multiple entry points for students within a class, such as ELLs, SWDs and HAs.  The administration will identify and support a Special Education vertical team lead who will implement study group to support specific strategies for academically struggling students. 2018-2019 Teacher Leaders NYC Central Staff All teachers Sept.-June 2018-2019 Administration, Teachers, Teacher Teams, Teacher Leaders 0  The administration will support teacher volunteers to design and implement school-wide academic vocabulary initiative to expand and support student academic language development.  The administration and teachers will continue to publish All teachers Sept.-June a quarterly newsletter sharing instructional updates to communicate school-wide instructional goals and vision so parents can better support their children at home. Teacher 2018-2019 Administration, Teachers  The administration will continue to implement a Leaders, quarterly coffee and conversation to maintain an open forum for parents to ask questions and share strategies for at-home learning.  The administration will support the implementation of the Health and Wellness Council, a collaborative team consisting of teacher leaders, parents and students to design programs and activities to promote the health and wellness of the community at large. Parents Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through Principal Coffee and Conversations, PTA meetings, school events and newsletters school leader and parents will communicate and share the common goals for the school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Trained administrator will conduct workshops and trainings, Recipient of grants from Wilson, Recipient of Health and Wellness Grant from the city, Use of DOE webinars, Borough Office support staff, in-house turn-keying of professional information, Professional texts and articles. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, the school leader will monitor the systems and structures created to develop and support teacher leadership by comparing their roles in professional learning meetings, school-wide activities, committees and events from last year to gauge teacher leadership by having 80% of teachers assume leadership roles. 1  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Minutes from Teacher Led Team Meetings Benchmark Evidences - Refined curriculum maps with standard alignment, rigor assessment, and feedback Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Offer enrichment programming during school and afterschool to create 21st Century learners through enhanced technology initiatives including rigorous instruction on coding, individual laptops for each child, and new smart-boards with latest interactive hands-on functionality.  Teacher led extracurricular activities where students collaborate across grade levels: School Newspaper, Literary Magazine, Web Design, Robotics, Math Olympiads, Garden Club, Book Club, Debate Team, and Poetry Club.  2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools Report highlighted Strong Family-Community Ties. 96% in Out Reach to Parents and 96% in Parent Involvement in School which are higher percentages than the city-wide average. In order to sustain parent satisfaction, there will be continued focus on maintaining an environment in which parents and students feel welcomed, supported, and respected.  PTA run parent surveys  Attendance during PTA meetings and parent workshops given throughout the year  Continue to collaborate with MS 67 , Alley Pond Environmental Center and community organizations to preserve and expand Wetlands which began in 2016  Collaborative activities with the community based organizations such as Douglaston Manor Association and Douglaston- Little Neck Historical Society - PS 98 Garden Club and DMA working together for the beautification of the community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our school will have a10% increase of parent volunteers leading school-wide family engagement events and activities as measured by a school created check-list. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Coordinator, PTA, Class Parents, Parent Volunteers, Administration  Expand family and community connection by informing Parents/ Fall 2018 Families Spring 2019 and encouraging participation in community events through the utilization of flyers, emails, school messenger service, school website, class representatives and newsletters.  Continue periodic outreach by teachers to parents to communicate informal feedback from various enrichment programs in an effort to foster and partner with teachers and enhance collaboration between home and school learning.  Expand parent, teacher and student participation in organized community events such as Udall's Cove Clean-up, Memorial Day Parade, Queens Library Art Show, PTA meetings, Ronald McDonald House, Trick or Treat Unicef, AshCan Art Exhibit, Wellness Fair, World Heritage Celebration, and school fundraisers.  Principal will continue to share the school-wide student performance data with the parent community.  Principal will continue to offer opportunities for teachers to become subject matter experts in either Math or ELA and use these skills to support colleagues.  Continue translation services for parents who speak other languages.  Expand World Heritage Celebration to celebrate cultural and linguistic diversity.  Continue to provide workshops for parents of students with disabilities including IEP workshop explaining the process of getting mandated services, community resources and tips for supporting their children at home.  Offer new and varied presentations to specifically maximize the attendance of parents of SWDs and ELLs parents who speak a language other than English at home will be provided with translated versions of all critical documents that the teacher or school sends home.  Parent surveys will be sent out at least two times a year. Parents will be surveyed to determine parent availabilities for volunteering and their interests so appropriate workshop activities and conferences can be 4 developed. Parents will also be surveyed about the times that work best for them to volunteer so that we can increase attendance at all events.  Provide formal and informal feedback to students and parents regarding positive student behavior on a regular basis to build foundations for a nurturing and trusting environment.  Expand series of parent workshops to support parents in fostering their children's meaningful learning experience at school and home.  Continue to provide opportunities for parents to participate in the survey time to time to voice their opinions.  Recognize students and student led events at PTA to encourage active participation within their school community.  Continue to provide babysitting services during PTA and parent meetings.  Recruit parents and alumni to volunteer at fund raising events to help set-up, oversee activities, clean-up, and solicit support and donations from local businesses. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  Alley Pond Environmental Center  DMA  Douglaston Little Neck Historical Society  The Douglas Manor Environmental Association  STEAMChess Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The goals and points in the action plan will be realized through the availability of school funds and PTA grants to purchase and provide resources. Outreach will be made to our Borough office for further support. Grants will be applied for to support our goals. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 5  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By January 2019, our school will have at least 3 events offered to parents and families sponsored by the school and/or PTA an there will be at least 30% family participation in a minimum of 3 of them as demonstrated by sign-in sheets or volunteer lists.  Maintain and review attendance sheets for workshops and meetings. After each workshop a brief feedback sheet will be completed by participants and will be reviewed by Administration and/or Parent Coordinator.  Coffee and Conversation sessions with Principal to gauge feedback from parents on actions taken four times per year.  Periodic school-generated surveys will be given to ascertain the ongoing impact of the implemented goals and initiatives including reflections and impact on the progress of the goals and initiatives during Teacher Team meetings Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meeting Attendance Sheets at each event, Survey Responses Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) TPR method; interactive writing; chants; realia and Wilson Program; Fundations; Guided Reading;Instructional Strategies for specific area of difficulty Manipulatives, visual representation, diagrams and models as provided by GoMath; Great Leaps for Math fluency work Inquiry/constructivist method Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) TCWRP assessments; ReadyGen benchmark assessments; state exams; teacher recommendation GoMath benchmark assessments; state exams; teacher recommendation Unit assessments; teacher recommendation Unit assessments; teacher recommendation Teacher recommendation; parent request Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school day Small group instruction During school day Small group instruction During school day During school day Interactive writing and realia Small group instruction One-to-one or small group During school day Guidance counselor services; social worker services and school psychologist services 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). None 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8 AIS, Counseling and Materials 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 0  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 1  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Doiuglaston School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [The Douglaston School] will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 3  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 4  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. The Douglaston School PS 98Q 40-20 235th Street Douglaston, NY 11363 5  School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) [The Douglaston School,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 6  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities to be sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; 7  ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 8  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name The Douglaston School Borough Queens School Number 098 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lena Kim Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Claudia Sparando Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Kelly Gallagher/Speech Superintendent Danielle Giunta Assistant Principal Diana Gautier Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent Patricia Levy Parent Coordinator Deborah Govier Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 272 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 6 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.21% 0  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 4 2 K NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 Lang. NA NA NA NA NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P. S. 98 evaluates students” academic reading skills using TCRWP as well as informal assessments and teacher observations. As part of ReadyGEN, students demonstrate their level of comprehension through a variety of responses to literature. Each reading unit is evaluated with a summative performance task. Of course, a variety of reading skills exists for each student, but usually critical thinking skills are the most difficult for students to master. The NYSITELL and NYSESLAT both provide information regarding students' strengths and weaknesses. As would be expected, regardless of the student's language level placement, writing is the most difficult modality. On the NYSITELL, the conventions of grammar usually proves to be an ongoing area of difficulty for ELLs. This same weakness can be seen on the NYSESLAT. Both these assessments show verb tense and agreement to be major difficulties even for some on the Advanced level. Generally, the same holds true for the speaking modality. The data provided by these assessments is useful in planning and differentiating instruction. All ELLs will benefit from our comprehensive developmental ELA program supported by ENL strategies and approaches. In addition the focus for ELLs will be overall language and content area development in addition to grade level reading and writing skills 1  mandated by NYS Standards. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Every effort is made to provide ongoing assessment and subsequent planning based on a variety of assessments. For example, professional development topics include additional teacher- created assessments to support ELLs' classroom performance. The development of unit plans provides scaffolding for these students as well as differentiating instruction. This differentiation helps ELLs become congruent with their classmates. In addition, common grade level prep periods allow the ENL teacher to collaborate with classroom teachers for general articulation, planning, etc. to ensure ELLs receive the best support. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The data from informal observations and evaluations, formal assessments, and standardized tests such as TCRWP is carefully examined. Analysis of the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT patterns across modalities are crucial to planning targeted instruction for the coming year. As previously mentioned, writing with all its variety of necessary skills, poses the greatest challenge for ELL students. The performance tasks from ReadyGen and all content area unit assessments are also used for this purpose. Although strengths and weaknesses vary with each student, generally ELLs show weaknesses in the use of grade-appropriate vocabulary, the ability to create complex sentences, organizational skills, and sometimes a lack of general knowledge. Also, especially in the upper grades, comprehension skills which require synthesis, analysis, and higher order thinking skills can be especially problematic. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After careful data analysis, classroom teachers, ENL teacher, and other support staff meet during common prep periods and/or professional development meetings to discuss and determine the best interventions for each ELL. As previously mentioned, differentiated instruction for ELLs is crucial to their overall acquisition of language and development of content area skills and, therefore, unit plans and other planning tools are modified for maximum support. Careful attention is given to vocabulary development and grammar conventions and scaffolding for content area skills is always the priority. Realia is used whenever available along with native language materials whenever possible. Newcomers receive carefully targeted modified instruction with overall language development in mind. When necessary, RTI, AIS and SAT intervention is incorporated. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The data from previously mentioned sources is analyzed by the classroom, AIS, and ENL teachers and students are categorized as below level, on level, above level. Accurate records are maintained in order to guide and plan instruction and monitor progress. The data for ELLs is subject to the same scrutiny as the general population and includes an analysis of meaning-based skills such as listening comprehension and conceptual knowledge. Educational plans designed for ELLs provide rigorous instruction in language as well as content area skills. Tier 1 instruction needs to be differentiated in order to specifically target ELLs. The focus of Tier 2 intervention is to make input as comprehensible as possible. This is always a priority for ELLS. Exposure to rich language is an integral part of the instruction. When tiered levels of instruction and additional intense intervention does not result in adequate progress, referral to the SAT remains an option. Every effort will be made, prior to referral, to rule out native language interference. Also, in order to determine the most effective additional support services for ELLs, the school takes into consideration the evidence suggested on Page 72 of English Language Learners Policy and Reference Guide. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns across performance levels on the NYSESTELL and NYSESLAT are useful for planning and instructional purposes. Long term analysis of data patterns reveals, for most students, listening and speaking to be the strongest modalities, although verb tense and agreement can be a difficulty. Listening is also dependent on focus and maturity. Students’ NYSITELL scores in Listening and Speaking generally improve on the NYSESLAT, although this may not 2  always be the case for special needs students. Reading scores may only reach Expanding even when Listening and Speaking reach Commanding. Writing, as would be expected, is usually the weakest modality and is often the impediment to reaching the Commanding Level. The data from these assessments is compiled and used to create targeted instruction. Student performance on the NYS ELA and Math tests are also used to evaluate and inform our ELL program. Again, depending on student's language level, these tests reveal difficulty with comprehension requiring analysis and synthesis such as making judgments, drawing conclusions, etc. In order to develop and/or remediate critical thinking skills, our language and literacy program always focuses on essential questions. EDAT data monitors the performance and progress of our students and analyzes many factors including years of ELL service, ELA and Math performance and progress, NYSESLAT proficiency and progress, SIFE status and disability classification. This electronic document provides a rich data mine which can be easily used to focus on the design of instructional programs and interventions for students. It can also add an early warning system to track risk factors. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The success of our ENL program is carefully monitored. Articulation with classroom teachers and support staff is ongoing. The data from informal observations and evaluations, formative and summative assessments, and standardized tests such as TCRWP is carefully examined. If it appears an ELL student is not making progress, articulation and congruence meetings are held to restructure curriculum. This data-driven, targeted instruction delivered in reconfigured ways usually alters student performance. When a student's performance on a variety of assessments including the NYSESLAT reveals little or no progress, and fine-tuning instruction does not help, then special consideration is given to further support from RTI and/or AIS. Referral to the SAT is always an option. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. PS 98’s ENL program is an English only, pull-out/push-in program. Entering and Emerging ELLs receive both standalone and integrated ENL usually using a push-in/pull-out model. Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding ELLs receive integrated ENL usually using a push-in model.. Regardless of which model is used, the ENL teacher delivers the instruction. ELL students are in ungraded, heterogeneous groups for the pull-out standalone portion. As per CR Part 154, students receive the required number of minutes for each level. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 3  P.S. 98 ensures that ELLs receive the mandated number of instructional minutes by having the programmer and ENL teacher collaborate to make sure ELLs are appropriately placed in a standalone and/or integrated ENL course. P.S. 98 has a free-standing ENL program model thus, as per CR Part 154.2, the ENL instructional minutes are delivered in the following way: • Entering and Emerging: Receive 360 minutes per week of both standalone and integrated ENL/ELA using a push-in/pull-out model. • Transitioning: Receive 180 minutes per week of both standalone and integrated ENL/Content Area, a push-in model is used. • Expanding: Receive 180 minutes per week of integrated ENL/ELA, a push-in model is used. • Commanding: Receive 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL/ELA, a push-in model is used. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Push-in Integrated ENL model: the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher work in collaboration to develop language and vocabulary support. The ENL teacher works with ELL students in classroom, explaining problematic vocabulary, language conventions, concepts, etc. during whole class instruction/small group instruction. Deconstructing vocabulary and language provides scaffolding which enables the ELL to better understand the common core curriculum. Realia in the form of maps, pictures, digital literacy skills, etc. is used when appropriate. Native language materials, if available, also lend support. Pull-out Standalone model: ELLs are brought together for general development of language and vocabulary skills, as well as reinforce classroom skills and content. TPR is used whenever possible along with language experience activities, picture books, puppetry, etc. English is used in each program model. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home language throughout the year by: 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE: P.S. 98 does not have any SIFE students presently. In the event these students become part of our population, plans are in place for their instruction. They will receive targeted instruction in all four modalities. Differentiated instruction based on a diagnostic/prescriptive approach from carefully analyzed assessment data will be designed. Scaffolding will support language and content area objectives. Additional support will be provided through AIS, peer tutoring, and after school programs. Every effort will be made to engage parents in their child's educational plan in hopes of generating stability. Testing accommodations such as extended time and separate location will be provided. The complete list of testing accommodations which appears on Page 47 of the ELL Policy and Reference Guide, will be consulted to determine future testing considerations when applicable. b. P. S. 98's newcomers receive a comprehensive program designed to address academic language acquisition, cognitive development, and social adjustment. Newcomers acquire language through a variety of methods and strategies. TPR is used with beginners in school for less than three years. Small group task oriented lessons guide language development. Along with modeling and repetition, these hands-on activities develop vocabulary and verbal skills, and provide opportunities to develop grammar and writing skills. Materials that address all modalities include Big Books, picture books, language experience charts, puppetry, and dramatic play. Realia is used as much as possible. Writing development remains a priority. Thinking maps will be used whenever appropriate. For content area instruction, scaffolding will support language and content area objectives and, when appropriate, higher thinking skills will be introduced. Native language materials, when available, will be used for 4  support. For those students required to take the NYS ELA exam after one year, plans are in place to familiarize students with test format and provide practice in the skills required. Testing accommodations such as extended time and separate location will be provided. The complete list of testing accommodations which appears on Page 47 of the ELL Policy and Reference Guide, will be consulted to determine future testing considerations when applicable. c. Developing: Students will receive targeted instruction in all four modalities. Differentiated instruction based on a diagnostic/prescriptive approach from carefully analyzed assessment data will be designed. Scaffolding will support language and content area objectives, and classroom lessons will be modified to ensure congruence. When appropriate, the push-in model will be used by the ENL teacher. Additional support by AIS and the Wilson Program will be put in place. Other helpful approaches include tiered questions and modified assignments. Students also receive thinking maps for writing and reading activities as a means to capture and organize their thoughts and understanding. Students will be provided with sentence frames and stems. Students will receive a bilingual vocabulary sheet for each unit of study. Students will receive leveled texts depending on proficiency levels. Testing accommodations such as extended time and separate location will be provided. The complete list of testing accommodations which appears on Page 66 -67 of the ELL Policy and Reference Guide, will be consulted to determine future testing considerations. d. Long Term: P.S. 98 does not have any Long Term ELLs at the present time. However, plans are in place in the event these students become part of our population. As stated in the academic interventions described for SIFE students, Long Term ELLs will receive targeted instruction in all four modalities. Differentiated instruction based on a diagnostic-prescriptive approach from carefully analyzed assessment data will be designed. Scaffolding will support language and content area objectives. Additional support will be provided through AIS, peer tutoring, and after school programs. Helpful materials include thinking maps, visual aids and sentence stems. Students will receive a reference sheet for speaking prompts. Should these approaches and methods prove unsuccessful, and if it becomes clear second language interference is not impeding student progress, then a referral to our SAT may be an option. Although parent cooperation will have been engaged long before this, it is imperative to have parent cooperation with this decision. Testing accommodations such as extended time and separate location will be provided. The complete list of testing accommodations which appears on Page 66-67 of the ELL Policy and Reference Guide, will be consulted to determine future testing considerations. e. Former ELLs: Students scoring at the Commanding Level on the 2017 NYSESLAT are entitled to 90 minutes of integrated ENL as per CR Part 154.2. provided by the ENL teacher. Students will receive two forty-five minute periods a week of ENL, focusing on continued vocabulary development, language convention skills and common core content area skills. Content area will determine which model, push-in/pull-out, will be used. Students will use thinking maps to promote writing and note taking. Students also will be provided with guiding questions for texts. This support will continue for two years. Our commanding level students are entitled to testing accommodations such as extended time and separate location for all exams. Certain other testing accommodations apply only to certain exams and standardized tests. A complete list of testing accommodations which appears on Page 66-67 of the ELL Policy and Reference Guide, will be consulted to determine future testing considerations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In general, ELL-SWDs are evaluated by a bilingual evaluator to establish language dominance. The student then receives services provided by the AIS teacher in addition to the ENL teacher. Our ELL-SWDs are in integrated co-teaching classes with a general education classroom teacher, certified Special Education teacher and paraprofessional. Ongoing articulation between the ENL teacher and the classroom staff work to design targeted instruction which will develop language as well as content area. When appropriate, lessons will be differentiated, but will be language rich in an attempt to keep congruency with peers. Some instructional strategies and grade-level materials that teachers of ELL-SWDs use that provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development are: • Thinking Maps are used to allow students to organize information as well as their ideas 5  • SMART board technology is used to make learning more interactive for students. • Read Aloud/Think Aloud: Is used to guide students thinking about a text and allows the teacher to model fluency. • Pre-teaching Vocabulary: Use of bilingual word wall, Vocabulary Study and Vocabulary Self-Collection strategy • Visual Aids and Realia • Accountable Talk 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The goal for ELL-SWD students is to ensure equitable standards-based ENL educational services for culturally and linguistically diverse special education students and their families. Instruction for ELL-SWD students includes: Scheduling flexibility promotes maximum learning for ELL-SWD students. It enables students to participate in a variety of groups, work independently and/or cooperatively , and participate in departmentalized areas of the curriculum. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. P.S. 98's classroom and ENL teacher along with support staff meet frequently for articulation and congruence both formally and informally at various forums such as common prep periods, PPT meetings, Tuesdays and other professional work time, etc. When possible, these meetings are attended by, in addition to classroom and ENL teachers, the AIS teacher, and the SAT staff. At these meetings, data analysis is used to establish targeted skills and objectives. Appropriate plans which reflect language as well as content objectives in ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science are discussed, along with modifications, strategies, approaches, methods, materials, etc. Native Language material is used whenever available and appropriate. Teachers implement the instructional programs and give feedback at subsequent meetings. These meetings also provide a forum for discussions relating to ELLs' social adjustment, special needs, etc. Since our ELL population is small, it is easier to determine and focus on student's strengths and weaknesses and assign them to fluid classroom subgroups to address their needs. Generally, most ELLs, regardless of language level, are part of their classroom writing subgroup. The following is a general overview of past and present subgroups. ELLs in kindergarten and first grade need overall language acquisition, and their grades provide general development of language and concepts. They are always part of concept development remedial subgroups with language support as well as reading and writing subgroups. First graders also receive additional support from the AIS and ICT teachers. Second grade beginning, emerging, and transitioning students usually require support in content area language, writing conventions, etc. They are usually part of subgroups targeting reading and writing skills. In upper grades, the amount of language and content area knowledge increases dramatically and, therefore, ELLs are usually in subgroups targeting these skills. ELLs are usually more proficient in math, but are most likely part of subgroups receiving instruction in problem solving. P. S.98 has several intervention services available for ELA, Math, and other content areas. In addition to AIS, there is the Wilson Program. Peer tutoring with speakers of the same Native Language as well as pedagogical staff tutoring are provided. All formal services are offered in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the 2018-2019 school year, we will implement a more structured and strategic plan for intervention specifically for Developing ELLs. The plan will involve consistent and close collaboration between the school leader, ENL teacher, parent coordinator and content area teachers. The ENL teacher will consistently work with the parent coordinator to increase parent outreach and involvement in the target students’ language development. Also, the ENL teacher will provide students with additional support to develop students’ academic language, develop writing skills by referring to student-friendly rubrics and develop speaking skills using the Accountable Talk protocol. It is our goal to have these target groups test-out of ENL. It is also our goal to help students feel more confident about participating in class activities that involve speaking and listening to peers. It might be beneficial to determine new entrants grade level in their native country and academic functioning in that grade in 6  order to place them appropriately here. Relying only on chronological age is not always the best placement, especially for students with very limited English. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time, there are no programs or services that will be discontinued for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. At our "get acquainted" meeting in the fall, school programs and services are presented to parents. This is in addition to our formal and informal interviews, our regular orientation meetings, and the parent option meeting conducted in September. At all these meetings, parents are made aware of our special programs after school programs and supplemental services available at P.S. 98. At our welcoming breakfast for all newly admitted students, the Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, and support staff present an overview of all programs and services. Special care is taken to introduce the parents of ELLs to the Parent Coordinator and ENL teacher. Translators are provided through the Translation and Interpretation Unit whenever necessary. "Back to School Night" provides parents with an opportunity to meet their child's classroom teacher and support staff, learn about curriculum, and find out about the programs and services available. Special programs in P. S. 98 include music and art programs which are available to all classes and club time activities such as Gardening, Poetry, etc. ELLs, past and present, are well represented in all programs and services, since all staff and visiting presenters are made aware of the needs of ELLs. As you can see, ELLs and their parents are always given special consideration especially when it comes to being informed. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs are supported by a variety of instructional materials. Realia is used as much as possible. Big Books, picture books, language experience charts, puppets, music, art materials and, when available, picture dictionaries in English and the Native Language. A representative sample of American literature of different genres is used, not only to develop language and vocabulary, but cultural literacy as well. As students advance in both language functioning and grade level, content area materials include thinking maps, graphic organizers, maps, time lines, charts, newspapers, magazines, etc. This realia supports academic language and functioning. Of course, ELL students are also exposed to regular classroom materials, but with modification and scaffolding. This provides congruence with classmates. School and classroom libraries provide books, magazines, etc., in several languages and this access to Native Language material is an important support for ELLs. The following are some innovative technological supports for ELLs: • SMART board technology is used to make learning more interactive for students. • Bilingual Glossaries • Document Camera (ELMO) • Lap tops and IPads • Bilingual digital math curriculum • Brain POP 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is assessed by the HLIS. In addition to establishing the home language, the parent indicates a preference to receive oral and written communications in the home language. Home language support is delivered in the ENL program through the use of bilingual glossaries and bilingual word walls. Newcomer and SIFE students are paired with a student who is literate in the students’ home language during class activities, which will help the student continue to develop 7  their home language as well as make material comprehensible. Cultural literacy is developed through the presentation of American literature. Comparing similar Native Language stories with their American counterparts shows a respect for other languages and cultures, as do holiday celebrations and World Heritage Celebrations. Parents are invited to visit their child's classroom and to read/tell a story from their homeland. DOE translators are provided for conferences, referrals, etc. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our classes are grouped heterogeneously, which promotes differentiated instruction. Classes are not language based. As a staff, we collaborate to make sure that all services and resources provided to students correspond to the students’ ages, grade level and proficiency level. For example, the ENL teacher meets with classroom/ICT teachers of ELL-SWDs to plan and implement lessons that target the students particular cognitive needs, while taking into consideration the students age and grade level. High interest/low level readers, modification of assignments and tests, individualized hands on tasks, when possible, help achieve congruence. All teachers and support staff have been trained in ENL methods, strategies, etc. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the year, the school leader facilitates a new student orientation. The school leader and parent coordinator present all the opportunities students will have at P.S. 98 including extra curricular activities such as chorus, web design, robotics, etc.. The ENL teacher will coordinate a mentorship program in which a newly enrolled ELL student will be paired with a peer mentor (preferably a peer who speaks the students’ home language) who will provide the student with information about the school and help the student feel welcome. Students who enroll throughout the school year will receive all the aforementioned considerations. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None are offered at this time : 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? As per the requirements of CR-Part 154.2, the ENL teacher will receive ELL-specific professional development at off-sites workshops and training. As mandated by CR-Part 154.2, 50% of the ENL teacher’s professional development will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction for ELLs. 15% of the required professional 8  development hours for all teachers must be dedicated to language acquisition, focusing on co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. The following professionals would be the target group in P.S. 98: the Assistant Principal, all common branch teachers, subject area teachers including music and technology, all Special Education ICT teachers, Guidance Counselors and Psychologists, the Speech Teacher, OT and PT teachers, Paraprofessionals, Parent Coordinator, and School Secretary. The workshops for pedagogical staff would primarily present the strategies and language functioning necessary for ELLs to be successful in content areas. Each content area would be presented at a different workshop based on prior assessment. Each workshop would begin with an overview of approaches, methods, and strategies for ELLs. Cooperative groups would be given a typical reading selection for that subject. The task would be to recognize problematic vocabulary, language conventions, and concepts that would have to be deconstructed. Then modified assignments and assessments would be designed using ENL strategies and approaches. The groups would implement their assignment and bring feedback to future workshops. Teachers of ELLs will work collaboratively with the ENL teacher to support ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher will meet weekly with grade teams during common planning time to support teachers in developing activities and using strategies that will best support ELLs in meeting standards. Activities will include multiple approaches to expand student vocabularies, deconstructing grammatical conventions which inhibit students' understanding of more difficult material, and presenting problematic concepts found in common core material. Time will be given to the value of scaffolding. The professional development discussed here will give teachers strategies to support student understanding of more complicated material. By scaffolding problematic vocabulary, language, and concepts, the teacher will make input comprehensible. The ENL teacher will attend district and city-wide workshops given by the DOE and outside approved vendors. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We will meet the professional development requirements of CR-Part 154.2 by: • Having the ENL teacher turnkey training of the staff in strategies and best practices for supporting ELLs. Of the staff’s yearly professional development, at least 15% will focus on integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Each teacher maintains documentation of professional development hours individually. Administration maintains records of agendas and attendance, while the presenter maintains the resources used for the workshop. • The ENL teacher will attend workshops or training on best practices for supporting ELLs. Of the ENL teacher’s yearly professional development, at least 50% will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction for ELLs. Please see Number 1 above for description of activities. Records will be maintained of meeting agendas and attendance in a binder in the Main Office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 9  Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher works closely with the parent coordinator to support and reach out to parents of ELLs. The ENL teacher will contact parents or guardians of ELLs via phone and/or email to schedule annual individual meetings in addition to the regularly schedules Parent Teacher Conferences and Parent Information Night. The ENL teacher will arrange for an in-person interpreter or an interpreter via phone conferences, as needed. The ENL teacher will keep a portfolio of student work in all content areas as well as track assessment data to record and determine students’ language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and students’ needs. The ENL teacher will share this data with the parent/guardian of the student. This portfolio provides the basis for the discussion of the student's work and suggestions for further development and/or remediation. The ENL teacher will explain how the ENL program will help to support and enrich the child’s language acquisition. At the same time. suggestions will be made as to how the parent can help develop literacy at home. These suggestions include visits to the library and reading native language stories and their English counterparts. The ENL teacher will also invite the classroom teacher to attend the meeting so that the parent/guardian will be informed of the child’s progress and needs within the classroom setting. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At the beginning of the school year, parents will participate in an Initial Parent Orientation, which offers parents the opportunity to learn about our school and the programs offered. During this initial meeting, we inform parents of the services mandated by the state that will be provided to their child as well as the three program choices. Parents will be provided with documentation and information in their home language and will be given the opportunity to ask clarifying questions or express concerns. We will use interpretation services to ensure that all parent voices are heard. An ELL Parent Conference will be conducted in the spring prior to the administration of standardized exams to review strategies parents can use at home to help their child prepare for the exams. This year we will hold parent workshops (bi-monthly) that will encourage parents/guardians to participate in and organize school events. The Parent Coordinator will ensure that all event fliers are sent home to parents of ELLs in their preferred language and will also collaborate with the ENL teacher to reach out to parents to ensure they have the opportunity to attend school events. Parents are invited to participate in classroom programs such as reading/story telling, birthday celebrations, volunteering for class trips and field day, etc. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lena Kim, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P. S. 98 Q School DBN: 26Q098 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Lena Kim Title Principal Diana Gautier Assistant Principal Deborah Govier Parent Coordinator Claudia Sparando ENL/Bilingual Teacher Patricia Levy Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 26Q098 School Name: P.S. 98 Superintendent: D. Giunta The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Deborah Govier Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. If the HLIS indicates a language other than English, parents are interviewed by our certified ENL teacher. During this interview, the parents' preferred language is determined and they are asked to fill out the DOE's form letter requesting this information, which is kept on file in the office, in ATS, by the classroom and ENL teachers, and the Parent Coordinator. Part III of the HLIS and the blue emergency cards also provide the parents' language of preference. Parents of non-ELL students and former ELL students may also request translation and interpretation services. A list of parents requesting translation/interpretation of correspondence is kept in the Main Office. During the Parent Orientation, the language of preference is once again confirmed. Parents are given a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities and the Department website which gives information in each covered language regarding translation and interpretation services and how to access these services. This all takes place well before the required thirty days. The school secretary runs the UPPG report in ATS to determine who in the P.S. 98 population needs translation/interpretation services. The UPPG is updated and maintained in order to provide ongoing services. 3  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral In addition to English, the most frequently requested languages at P.S. 98 are Korean and Chinese. Other preferred languages include Spanish and Greek. English 407 94.65 404 Chinese (Any) 17 Mandarin 0 Korean 1 Spanish 5 3.95 15 2 4 5 0 0.23 l.16 3.49 3.49 .47 .93 1.16 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 4  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parents' requests for translation of documents and notices are known to all staff members. Our Parent Coordinator contacts the Translation and Interpretation Unit in a timely fashion to request translations of documents. The procedures followed are outlined on the Translation and Interpretation Unit's website. The following information typically disseminated every year and translated for parents when requested is as follows: Parent Handbook - translated by the T & I Unit and distributed at the Parent Orientation Meeting, Monthly calendars Parent-Teacher Conference Program and special events announcements NYS testing dates - Report cards - translated by and ordered from the DOE. 5  Parent Handbook - 9/18 End of previous month Parent- Teacher Conference dates and time preferences - sent 10 days before meeting End of previous month When announced 6  As soon as possible 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 7  The following formal face-to-face meetings P.S. 98 will typically have with parents are as follows: Curriculum/Back to School Night - Parent-Teacher Conferences - mandated Engagement Time - every Tuesday afternoon. Informal interactions include phone calls to parents from teachers, social worker, ENL teacher, and administration. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parents' requests for interpretation services are known to all staff members. Our Parent Coordinator contacts the Translation and Interpretation Unit in a timely fashion to arrange interpretation services, usually over the telephone. Parents also consistently bring friends or family members to these meetings and the Parent Coordinator knows in advance if the parents are providing their own interpreter. Curriculum/Back to School Night 9/13/18 Parent Teacher Conferences - mandated dates: 11/15/18, 3/14/19, 5/15/19 Engagement Time - notices sent out frequently with reminders Informal interactions-a few days prior, parents are asked for preferred dates 8  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, plans are in place to contact family members or friends of limited-English- proficient parents both by phone, text, and/or email in their preferred language in order to relay information These contacts are maintained on the Blue Emergency Card in the Main Office. A school-wide list is also kept in the Main Office. Individual classroom teachers are also informed separately and a list is kept in the classroom with these emergency contacts. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members are aware of Chancellor's Regulation A-663. At the beginning of each school year, parents' language preferences are compiled and staff members are informed of these preferences. Language preferences are maintained in the Main Office, ATS, Blue Emergency Cards, etc. Staff members contact our Parent Coordinator for translation and/or interpretation services. In addition, staff members reach out to parents to ascertain if family members and/or friends are available. Possibly, a staff meeting or staff development session may be devoted to translation and interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The multilingual Welcome Poster listing the covered languages is prominently displayed facing the entrance through which parents and visitors walk. The poster clearly signals the welcoming environment in P.S. 98 as well as informs parents of the languages available for translation and interpretation. The Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities, distributed to parents at the time of registration and when another language is indicated on the HLIS, also informs parents of their right to translation and interpretation services and the languages available for these services as does the Parent Guide to Language Access. As previously mentioned, the Language Identification Guide is displayed at the Security Desk in the main entrance as well as the School Secretary's desk in the Main Office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 9  P. S. 98 has a parent survey in place to determine if limited-English-proficient parents are satisfied with the services they and their students have received. Periodic phone calls and conferences with parents also provide feedback as to the quality of our services. Parents, generally, are more likely to report satisfaction during informal meetings. A focus group comprised of parents of different cultures and languages to gather feedback on best practices, etc., is being considered. 0 
