 28Q099 School Name: P.S. 099 KEW GARDENS Principal: PAULETTE FOGLIO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 99Q, The Kew Gardens School 28Q099 342800010099 K-6 School Number (DBN): 82-37 Kew Gardens Road, Kew Gardens, New York 11415 718-544-4343 Phone Number: 718-544-5992 Fax: Aida Trujillo AAceved5@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Paulette Foglio Rebecca Blank Miriam Kessler Darlene Connell N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 28 Superintendent’s Office Address: Mabel Muniz-Sarduy Superintendent: 90-27 Sutphin Boulevard, Jamaica, New York 11435 MSarduy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-557-2618 Phone Number: Queens FSC: 718-557-2623 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Marlene D. Wilks Executive Director:   82-01 RockawayBoulevard, Ozone Park, New York 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-385-1843 Phone Number: N/A Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Paulette Foglio Rebecca Blank Miriam Kessler Darlene Connell N/A N/A N/A Aida Trujillo Margaret Collins Meghan Parillo *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Assistant Principal Teacher/3-6 GE/3-6 ELL Teacher/3-6 SE/Clusters/Related Services   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nancy Williams Teacher/K-2 ELL/K-2 SE Vacancy Lisa Fu Vacancy Laura Mantanez Michael Leroy Vacancy Parent/K-2 ELL Parent/K-2 SE Parent/Related Services Parent/K-2 GE Parent/K-2 ELL/3-6 GE Parent/3-6 SE/3-6 ELL Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to create a balanced child who functions within a safe and secure environment. We strive to produce in our diverse school community a respect for each other and for the environment. We help our students develop a love of learning while striving for excellence. Mobilizing our collective talents as parents and teachers, we will work to ensure that each child:  Develops a love and need to read    Experiences writing for a variety of purposes  Develops the ability to understand and solve mathematical problems  Develops the ability to use and integrate technology into his/her life  Experiences the Arts  Chooses healthy habits to last a lifetime  Develops an appreciation of the responsibilities and privileges of living in the United States of America We add to the richness of the lives of our students by engaging the resources of staff, parents, cultural institutions and community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented.  P.S. 99, comprised of approximately 783 students from a multitude of countries and speaking about 29 different languages, demonstrates that a multicultural school community can work collaboratively to be successful. Our school population is comprised of:  0% American Indian or Alaska Native  6% Black  38.5% Hispanic  27.2% White  22% Asian  3% Other  12.3% English Language Learners  19.8% Special Education Students  59.8% Economically Disadvantaged  50.5% Males  49.4% Females  10.4% Temporary Housing Our K-6 school prides itself in fostering academic excellence through art integration (Framework for Great Schools (FFGS), Supportive Environment). It is our belief that every child has a talent and it is our responsibility to nurture and develop those talents. Our school’s motto is “Every Child Matters”. Our fully licensed staff works together as a team to provide congruent common core aligned instruction across each grade level. Our Literacy, Math, Technology and Special Education Teams facilitate the implementation of the citywide instructional expectations, school goals, instructional focus, and implementation of new programs and initiatives. On a walk through of P.S. 99, it is evident that we believe in laying the foundation for college and career readiness (FFGS, Effective Leadership). Instruction is differentiated through our TAG Program, Enrichment Program, and Academic Intervention Services in addition to the use of multiple entry points in the classroom. It is our mission to instill in children a love of learning and reading, while providing them the opportunity to become critical thinkers and problem-solvers. In addition, we also afford students many opportunities to express themselves through their technological, athletic, and artistic abilities. The school welcomes and provides many opportunities for collaboration between staff and parents. School Leadership, Summit, and Parents’ Association meetings are held monthly. Our Parents’ Association and School Leadership Team work cohesively (FFGS, Collaborative Teachers and Strong Family Community Ties) to represent their constituents and maintain open and ongoing communication. In addition, parent involvement is evident through their attendance at workshops, Tea with the Principal, and special events. Parents often plan and host school wide activities, such as the World Fest, Scholastic Book Fair, Teacher Appreciation Breakfast, Bake Sales, Community Flea Market, and Winter Festival Celebration. They also work closely with teachers in planning for the Second Grade Moving Up Ceremony and the Sixth Grade activities including the play, picnic, and prom. The P.S. 99 school community is also organized for effort with emphasis on character building, civic duties and civic responsibilities, as evidenced through our daily announcements of the Pledge of Allegiance, Student Council and Project Wisdom (FFGS, Trust). 0  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. At this time, 10.47% of our students are in temporary housing and these students are in need of socio-emotional support services. Our BIT (Behavioral Intervention Team) and our SAT (School Assessment Team) have been instrumental in providing services such as behavioral modification plans, assessments, counseling, and family outreach and support. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school was designated as a school in Good Standing by the New York State Education Department for the 2017-2018 school year. According to the School Quality Guide, our school has exceeded the target in the areas of Rigorous instruction, Collaborative Teachers , Effective School Leadership, and Strong Family-Community Ties. In the area of Collaborative Teachers, we were rated well developed according to the Quality Review (2017-2018) and according to the NYC School Survey (2016-2017) we received a score of 96%, which is up 5 points from the previous year. This past year we continued emphasizing working diligently with our attendance committee to monitor lateness and absences very carefully. We put systems in place to track lateness and provide support to families in an attempt to decrease the amount of times our students came late to school. We will continue this process. Effective Leadership was rated at 96% as per our NYC School Survey. This is up four points from the previous year. The NYC School Survey (2016-2017) shows that we are at 88% in the category of supportive environment. We will work on improving this area by bringing in a program called Sanford Harmony. This program will provide students in our school a greater opportunity to develop their social and emotional well being. We will also continue to focus on the area of Collaborative Teachers by providing teachers with continued opportunities and support to work together to improve their instructional practices that lead to student progress. We will continue to keep this as one of our areas of focus this school year. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q099 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 785 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 43 41 24 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 20 20 17 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 67.0% % Attendance Rate 61.7% % Reduced Lunch 12.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 37.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 28.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 16.1 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 62.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 91% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 123 117 15 94.5% 5.2% 20.4% 6.2% 23.1% 4.2% 4 0% 6.1 67.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1) Analysis of our 2017-2018 NYS Department, indicates that in the category of Student Achievement: 63% of our students met state standards on the NYS ELA Assessment. The city average for performance at proficiency level was 46.7% for the NYS ELA Test We are doing better than the city by 16.3%. Although we performed better than the city, we must expand every effort to ensure that growth in this area is increased. In the 2016-2017 Quality Review we were rated excellent in the level of interest and challenge in our curriculum. We also received a rating of excellent in the effectiveness in teaching and learning. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, in the area of Rigorous Instruction we scored 4.39 and 79% of teachers responded positively to questions about Rigorous Instruction. "82% of students say that their classes at their school make them think critically." 2)Analysis of our 2017-2018 School Report Card indicates:  12.3% of our student population are English Language Learners  19.8% of our student population are Students with Disabilities  10.47% of our student population are living in temporary housing. October 2018 Meal Accountability Roster (RMEA) indicates:  59.8% of our student population are Economically Disadvantaged Students In the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, score in the area of Rigorous Instruction was 4.39 which resulted in a rating of: Exceeding the Target. 2) Although our school has done well in the area of Rigorous instruction, our data shows subgroups with high percentages in need. In order to continue in an upward trend in this area, we have decided to work on Visible Learning. The priority need is that teachers begin to become very familiar with the ELA Next Generation Standards and are able to identify learning intentions and success criteria. Teachers will focus on providing more clear and direct feedback to students to move their understandings further along. This will create and promote successful student 3  outcomes within our school. In addition, teachers will continue to work on differentiating instruction and providing appropriately challenging multiple entry points for students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will make learning intentions and success criteria more visible to students, which will result in 53% of students performing at or above grade level proficiency as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students in grades K-6 9/18-6/19  Teachers will be introduced to the concept of Visible Administrators, Coach, K-6 teachers, cluster teachers and paraprofessionals. Learning developed by Steve Ventura.  Teachers will engage in a series of professional development sessions related to Visible Learning.  Teachers will have opportunities to reflect on how they teach and the impact it has on student achievement.  A standards continuum across the grades will be created in collaboration with teachers.  The continuum will include specific ELA Standards,  learning intentions, and success criteria. Literacy Team members will develop and coordinate Visible Learning professional development sessions, activities, and continuum design.  Teachers will emphasize to students what they are learning about and why they are learning about it.  The coach will also mentor new teachers to provide personalized one to one support in all facets of instruction. Coach will input mentoring information in the Mentoring Tracking System.  Pacing calendars will reflect units of study for the year.  Universal Literacy Coach will collaborate and support our K-2 Teachers.  Teachers will emphasize the use of multiple entry points especially for students with disabilities to increase opportunities for them to understand the concepts that are being taught.  ENL, SETSS, Special Education Teachers will provide Standalone/ Integrated instruction.  Technology will be utilized to enhance and support instruction through the use of Smart boards, computers, virtual tours, educational/intervention online programs and web conferences. Students who need additional assistance will take part in AIS instruction.   RTI will be offered to students who need extra support in addition to AIS services. Students in grades K-6 9/18-6/19 Administrators, Coach, K-6 teachers, cluster teachers and paraprofessionals. 5   Professional development calendar will be created for  the 2018-2019 school year. Literacy Team will be scheduled on Tuesdays, periods 5 and 6 in our preparation schedule. They will meet at least once a month depending on our needs.  The Next Generation Standards will be utilized as a tool. N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Next Generation Common Core Standards in order to support their children at home by:  Hosting a variety of parent workshops during the school year  Providing information during School Leadership Meetings, Parents’ Association Meetings, Summit Meetings, Tea with the Principal, Curriculum Conferences and other school events. The above mentioned opportunities provide parents with opportunities to learn about specific grade topics, school goals, special events, engage in Q & A sessions, and discuss how they can better help their child be successful. School Messenger will be utilized to alert parents of special events, parent workshops, Parent Teacher Conference and meetings held at school. Messages will be conducted in English and Spanish. In addition, our school website, PS99.org, will be updated periodically to also inform parents of school events, etc. It also serves as a resource where they can access educational websites currently used by our teachers and students, school calendars, newsletters, informational letters, and breakfast/lunch menus, etc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Grades must be programmed for weekly common preps  Administrators will provide timely feedback through post conferences in addition to written feedback. o A professional development calendar will be developed by administration for the 2018-2019 school year.  Teachers will also be able to use the Tuesday “Professional Work” time to meet as a grade.  We will seek outside resources in alignment to this goal to support this work.  Teachers will attend grade meetings with the administrators.  Administrators and Coach will work closely with staff and monitor progress.  Literacy Team will meet periodically and it will be scheduled in our prep schedule on Tuesdays, periods 5 and 6.  Next Generation standards will be utilized. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 6  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 40% of students will be on or above grade level in ELA as measured through the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress towards meeting the mid-point benchmark will be the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, we obtained a section score of 3.81 in the area of Supportive Environment. Overall, in the section rating we received a section rating of: Meeting Target. In the 2016-2017 Quality Review, we received a rating of Well Developed in the area of 1.4 (Positive Learning Environment) and 3.4. (High Expectations). The Quality Review indicated, " All staff members communicate and partner with families to support expectations for college and career readiness for all students. Staff communicates and support high expectations to students. 2. Our school is comprised of 783 students of which 50.5% (396) are males and 49.4% (387) are females. According to our School Quality Snapshot, our school enrollment is made up of 6% Black, 38.5% Hispanic, 27.2% White, and 22% Asian. English Language Learners account for 12.3% and Special Education Students account for 19.8% of our population. The October 2018 Housing Status Detail Screen (RHST) Report in ATS, states that 82 of our students are living in temporary housing which is 10.47% of our student population. In addition, the June Meal Accountability Roster (RMEA) in ATS, indicates that 59.8% of our students are deemed economically disadvantaged. In looking at our ATS records it indicates that last year, (2017-2018) 5.2 % of students had been late to school during the school year. In addition, in speaking to teachers during grade, SLT, and Summit meetings, we have found an increase over the past few years of students who are coming to school with greater social emotional needs. These needs are often not addressed at home and we have decided to partner with Sanford Harmony to help in remedying this problem. We are hoping that through the use of this program students learn how to self regulate their emotions, increase their attention skills, self discipline, self motivation, organizational skills, value differences in their peers, etc. 3. In order to support the whole child, we offer and will continue to offer parent workshops and parent ENL classes. Our school guidance counselor works very closely with our staff and students. In addition, he conducts workshops for our staff throughout the school year. This year we piloted the Inner Explorer, a mindfulness online program which gave access to all our students K-6 to grade level appropriate meditation and visualization practices. We found it to be beneficial for all and are therefore continuing with the program. Our peace committee organizes events throughout the year to promote peace in our school and our world. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our students in grades K-5 will have participated in the Sanford Harmony Program, where they will be empowered to communicate effectively, collaborate with their peers, embrace diversity and resolve conflict appropriately resulting in a 10% decrease in the amount of students who are referred to the school dean. 8 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students in grades K-5. 9/18-6/19 Administrators, All classroom teachers, Guidance Counselor, Dean, and cluster teachers. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).   The school will partner with Sanford Harmony which is a social emotional program that builds strong relationships and supportive learning communities. Sanford Harmony activities will promote tolerance, compassion, and good citizenship skills. in an effort to reduce bullying, and help develop the youth of today into tolerant, compassionate, and caring adults for the future.   Teachers will receive professional development in alignment to this program.  Teachers will incorporate evidenced based strategies such as Meet Up and Buddy Up into their classrooms.  Teachers will utilize the Sanford Harmony curriculum to engage students in a variety of character lessons throughout the school year.  Assistant principal will conduct disciplinary expectation  assemblies for all students in September. Inner Explorer which is an online mindfulness program will be utilized by all classes throughout the year.  Behavior Intervention Team will meet regularly and work closely with teachers as necessary.  Peer mediation will continue to be utilized to provide a peaceful means to resolve conflicts.  Peace committee will meet regularly and will sponsor events promoting peace events throughout the year.  Caught Being Good Program will reward classes that have been caught being good. Each week, the class that has the most Caught Being Good Certificates will get an extra period of gym.  Parents speaking languages other than English will be contacted by someone who speaks their language to address their concerns. Support services will be offered to families as necessary, including those in temporary housing. Students with special needs will have access to counseling as necessary.    ENL's will have access to the Sanford Harmony Program through their ENL Teacher. 9  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support their children at home by:  Inviting and encouraging parents to attend the mandated four parent Teacher conferences and Open School Week to learn about their child’s curriculum and grade expectations.  Offering a variety of Parent Workshops regularly throughout the year that will address parenting concerns.  Holding a special workshop informing parents of the Sanford Harmony Program.  Discussing the importance of addressing the social emotional needs of children.  Inviting parents to Tea with the Principal to gain a better understanding of what their child will learn throughout the school year and how they can assist their child at home  Holding monthly Parent Association, SLT, and Summit meetings to provide an opportunity to work closely with the school, as well as host special events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Paraprofessionals will assist teachers/students in implementing Sanford Harmony Program.  Guidance Counselor will support implementation of Sanford Harmony Program.  All administrators, teachers and School Based Support Team will work together in the implementation of Sanford Harmony. Sanford Harmony materials will be purchased for all classrooms and support personnel. Inner Explorer Program will be purchased for all classrooms and support personnel.   Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will have a decrease of 5% of the number of students referred to our school dean. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Dean referral tracking sheet will be the specific instrument of measure used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. According to the 2016-2017 Quality Review:   In the area of 4.2 Teacher teams and leadership development the school was rated: Well Developed Findings reinforce that: “The vast majority of teachers are engaged in inquiry-based collaborations that ensure the promotion of school goals and implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards. There are distributed leadership structures embedded in the school’s culture.”  The impact specifies that: “The work of teacher teams has resulted in a collection of best practices, improved pedagogy and increased collaboration. Teachers share leadership roles and make key decisions to improve student learning.” Written feedback from our school’s PPO in 2017-2018 stated that “Across the vast majority of classrooms visited, teachers had learning targets clearly displayed on the board and they unpacked the requirements of the learning target so all their students were aware of the lesson's expectations. There's evidence of differentiations of instructions for classrooms with scaffolds, which target different groups of students. The classroom instruction also embeds academic vocabulary aligned to the school's instructional focus. the use of data is evident, however, it can be more strategically used for ELLs and SWDs subgroups, or even high achievers with the ability to attempt even more appropriate and challenging tasks." 2. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, in the area of Collaborative Teachers we achieved a score of 4.48 which resulted in an overall section rating of: Exceeding the Target. The Quality Review reflected that both 4.1 and 4.2 received a Well Developed designation. Analysis of the School Quality Guide for the 2017-2018 school year indicates:  12.3% of students are English Language Learners  19.8% of students have Individualized Educational Plans According to the 2017-2018 School Report Card:  63% of students performed at proficiency levels (3s and 4s) on the NYS Common Core ELA Exam which is a 15% increase from the year before.  11% of ENL students performed at proficiency levels (3s and 4s) on the NYS Common Core ELA Exam  56% of ENL students performed at proficiency level 1  33% of ENL students performed at proficiency level 2 Team meetings (literacy, math, SLT), Teacher Share Meetings and grade level reflections regarding this goal revealed that: 1   Developing Toolkit strategies for struggling readers and the accelerated learner in past years has generated successful outcomes.  At this time, the priority need is developing a strategies toolkit for our ENL Learners.  Teachers shared that they would like to continue engaging in reflection sessions  Teachers need more time allocated to researching ENL Strategies, activities and tasks that are directly aligned to lessons from instructional programs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 3-6 classroom teachers will engage and collaborate in data discussion cycles in ELA, focusing on developing effective ENL strategies for teacher practice, which will result in 53% of students performing at or above grade level proficiency as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell Assessment. 2 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ENL Students 9/18-6/19 Administrators, ENL Teachers, classroom teachers, and Coach. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  K-6 teachers will engage and collaborate in a series of data cycles where they conduct an in depth analysis of student performance and discuss instructional next steps.  K-6 Classroom teachers will engage and collaborate in 3 (4 week) cycles to create an ENL Learner's toolkit. Teachers will research and implement strategies for the ENL Learners based on individual student needs to provide multiple entry points and differentiation. The data cycles will guide the creation of the toolkit.  Teachers in grades K-2, will utilize CKLA (Core Knowledge Language Arts).  Teachers in grades 3-5, will utilize the Expeditionary Learning Program. Sixth grade teachers will utilize the Wonders Program.   Grades 3-6 will use the Comprehensive Ready Program.  All students will engage in small group instruction via guided reading.  Teachers will meet during the Monday PD time to engage in data cycles where they will look closely at student work and data. They will document areas of strengths and weakness and determine next instructional steps.  Teachers will engage in professional development sessions to gain a deeper understanding on how to meet the varying levels of student needs with a focus on the ENL Student.  ENL Teachers will turnkey strategies such as Think, Jot, Pair, Share and SCAMPER.`  Teachers will have opportunities to attend professional development sessions provided by outside agencies.  ENL teachers will continue to attend ENL Institutes sponsored by the Queens South Field Support Office.  Teachers will be allotted time to research a variety of strategies and create a toolkit of hands on activities/tasks/strategies.  Activities/tasks/strategies will be used as multiple entry  points and/or differentiation. Service providers will articulate with classroom teachers and assist in providing needed services. 3   ENL teachers will provide services to ENLs through a Standalone/Integrated model.  RTI services will be offered to students who need extra support in addition to AIS.  Teachers will assess students regularly in alignment to  the curriculum. Special Education Team, Behavioral Intervention Team, Math Team, and Literacy team will meet regularly throughout the year to assist in implementation of programs, provide guidance, professional development, turn-key workshops and share best practices.  Observations will provide specific feedback in this area. N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  All parents will be invited to attend the Four Parent Teacher Conferences and Open School Week to learn about their child’s curriculum and standards for the year.  Teachers will meet as necessary with parents during the Parent Engagement time on Tuesdays.  A variety of Parent workshops will be offered to parents regularly throughout the year.  Parents will be invited to Tea with the Principal to gain a better understanding of what their child will learn throughout the school year and to continue to have open lines of communication between home and school.  Parents will be invited to our Talented and Gifted Fair  Parents’ Association will hold monthly meetings to provide parents an opportunity to work closely with the school. They will also, host special events throughout the school year such as a Winterfest, Punch and Pillow Day, Career Day, TAG Fair, Scholastic Book Fair, Bake Sales, etc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  ENL teachers- Provide instruction and professional development  Programs- Core Knowledge Language Arts, Expeditionary Learning and Wonders.  Benchmark and interim assessments aligned to curriculum.   Administrative staff, Coach, and teacher leaders will provide workshops and allot time for teacher team Fountas & Pinnell benchmarking kits will be utilized meetings during the Monday PD Time.  Materials for tools, online resources, journals, etc.  Data specialist will assist teacher teams in gathering and interpreting data reports.  Action plan sheet will be utilized by classroom teachers to document strategies for corrective teaching,  interventions and extensions. Flexible TAG/Academic Intervention Services/Enrichment groups will be modified as needed throughout the year. 4   Preparatory Schedule will include common preps per grade for the purpose of collaborative planning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 40% of students will be on or above grade level in ELA as measured through the ELA Benchmark Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress towards meeting the mid-point benchmark will be the Fountas & Pinnell benchmark assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  As a school we have improved in the area of 1.2 Pedagogy as per our 2016-2017 Quality Review where we received a rating of Well Developed.  According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide in the area of Effective School Leadership our school received a section score of 4.10 which translated into an overall Section Rating of: Exceeding Target. This School Quality Guide indicates that the Quality Review, indicators 1.3 (Leveraging Resources) and 3.1 (Goals and Action Plans) were rated Well Developed. The NYC School Survey indicated an overall 96% in the area of Effective School School Leadership.  The 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot states that 96% of parents and teachers responded positively to questions about Effective School Leadership. This is a strength as it is higher than the city or district average which is at 87%. This is also a 4% increase for us as a school from the previous year.  Teachers have shared that the time dedicated during the Monday PD time has been instrumental in collaborating on planning, looking at student work, learning new strategies, and analyzing data.  Although, we have made improvements in this area, it is one which the school community has decided to continue to emphasize as it is critical to continue performing well in this area.  The priority will be to align the professional learning plan to the school’s goals and instructional focus. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will have participated in a yearlong professional development learning plan that will support them in the implementation of our CEP Goals resulting in 95% teachers receiving a rating of effective or highly effective in the area of Growing and Developing Professionally through the use of the Advance System. 6 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K-6 Students 9/18-6/19 Administrators, coach, K-6 teachers, cluster teachers and data specialist. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Administrators will share school goals and instructional focus with all staff at the beginning of the school year.  Administrators will share CEP Action plans with all staff.  Administration will design a professional development calendar for the 2018-2019 school year.  Teachers will engage in professional development sessions during the Monday PD Sessions, prep and learns, and common grade meetings throughout the year.  Teachers will attend outside professional development sessions as needed.  Teachers will also be informed of outside professional  development sessions available to them. Literacy coach will work closely with administration to plan and organize professional development sessions.  We will partner with organizations such as Sanford Harmony, Churchill School and Center, and The Children's Health Fund to provide in-house specific professional development sessions to our staff.  Topics will include Character education, Chronic Absenteeism, Addressing Trauma, Health Referrals, etc.  Teachers will be provided with guiding questions to promote and enhance discussions.  We will continue to partner with our ELL Service Coordinator and and Borough Deputy Director for ELL's to provide continued support to our ENL teachers.  ENL teachers will attend field support office professional development sessions and they will turn key information to colleagues. Strategies such as Think, Jot, Pair, Share and SCAMPER will be the focus of ENL Sessions.   Teachers who attend professional development sessions will turn key information, engage in sharing best practices, and implement strategies in the classroom.  All teachers will have weekly common preps to engage in team planning and sharing.  Key staff members will present on mandated topics such as, Child Abuse, Nurse's Points, OSHA, MOSL, Epi-Pen, Testing Administration Handbook, etc. 7    Literacy coach and administrators will work with teachers closely to provide additional support as necessary. Literacy coach will host New Teacher Meetings every Tuesday. N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed of the progress of this goal at PA, SLT, Summit and Parent /Teacher Meetings. Our teachers along with our parent coordinator will provide specific parent workshops that will be in alignment to our school goals and mission. The organization, Children's Health Fund, will also conduct parent workshops for our families. This will promote parent leadership, support and engagement which will enable them to better support their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Professional Learning Calendar aligned to school goals, instructional focus, and mandates will be developed  We will partner with Sanford Harmony, Churchill School & Center and the Children's Health Fund  Time will be allotted during Monday PD’s for collaborative planning, sharing, and learning  Teachers will be provided with weekly common preps  Coach will provide support and assist with resources  Administrators will conduct observations and provide timely and purposeful feedback to teachers  Key staff members will attend and/or present professional development sessions Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, administrators will have monitored progress of this goal by analyzing ratings of teachers in the area of Growing and Developing Professionally through the use of the advance system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 8  The instruments of measure that will be utilized is the Advance System. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  According to our 2017-2018 School Quality Snapshot, our school received a rating of 4.01 in the overall category of Strong Family-Community Ties. Although there was a slight decrease of .04, this is now a strength for us since it improved from a 3.92 rating the previous year.  According to our 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, we obtained a rating of Well Developed in our QR and a 94% rating in the NYC School Survey. The section score was a 4.05 which translated to a section rating of: Exceeding Target. The 2017-2018 School Quality Guide indicates:  95% of parents felt positive about the outreach to parents  92% of parents felt positive about parent involvement at the school  4.99 was the score related to the question: "How effectively does the school partner with families to support student success?"  Our school is comprised of 783 students of which 50.5% (396) are males and 49.4% (387) are females. According to our School Quality Snapshot, our school enrollment is made up of 6% Black, 38.5% Hispanic, 27.2% White, and 22% Asian. English Language Learners account for 12.3% and Special Education Students account for 19.8% of our population. The October 2018 Housing Status Detail Screen (RHST) Report in ATS, states that 82 of our students are living in temporary housing which is 10.47% of our student population. In addition, the October 2018 Meal Accountability Roster (RMEA) in ATS, indicates that 59.8% of our students are deemed economically disadvantaged. In looking at our ATS records it indicates that last year (2017-2018) 5.2 % of students had been late to school during the school year. In addition, in speaking to teachers during grade, SLT, and Summit meetings, we have found an increase over the past few years of students who are coming to school with greater social emotional needs. These needs are often not addressed at home and we have decided to partner with Sanford Harmony and Children's Health Fund to try to remedy this problem. These partnerships, in addition to working with our students, will also be working with our students' families so that we are all in alignment in helping students perform to their full potential. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of parent workshops with topics aligned to parenting strategies and resources critical to supporting student achievement and personal growth will increase by 20%. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Our school website will highlight special events, K-6 Students 10/18-6/19 Parent Coordinators, teachers, and administrators upcoming meetings and parent workshops.  Our school website will also provide parents with links to web based programs used by our students.  All school phone announcements will be made in both English and Spanish.  Parent Coordinator will remind parents of upcoming events and whenever needed arrange translation in languages other than English.  Parent Workshops in a variety of topics will be presented monthly throughout the school year.  The focus of parent workshops will be parenting strategies aligned to our school goals to support parents in helping their children succeed in school.  We will partner with Studio in a School to provide a series of family engagement art workshops.  The former Learning Leader Program will now be known in our school as the P.S. 99 Learning Leaders Program. This program will enhance student achievement by providing individualized instruction and overall classroom support to students and teachers.  Parent Coordinator will oversee current volunteers and promote the need for new volunteers.  We will utilize the IntelliCorp Company to screen new   volunteers into the program. Learning leaders will be assigned to classroom teachers by student and teacher need. Learning leaders that speak a second language may be paired with an ENL student that speaks the same language whenever possible.  Parent coordinator will work closely with volunteers to familiarize them with school policies and goals.  Parent coordinator will provide professional development for the learning leaders.  Parent coordinator will keep track of their attendance throughout the school year. 1  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Studio in a School   Cultural After School Adventures (CASA) and Queens Museum  Touchstone Center for Children and the Imagination  American Ballet Theatre  Third Street Music Settlement  Guggenheim Museum  Maple Grove Cemetery    Children's Health Fund Jamaica Hospital Sanford Harmony Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Parent Coordinator  P.S. 99 Learning Leaders  Classroom Teachers    Children's Health Fund  Prep Schedule will allow 2 teachers time to present at parent workshops. Studio in a School Program depending on budget funds Sanford Harmony Program will be purchased Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of the parent workshop topics planned for the school year will have been presented to parents/guardians. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress towards meeting the mid-point benchmark will be the parent workshop calendar and agendas for the parent workshops. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) *Students who score between a level 2 and a level 3 on a grade 3-6 ELA State Assessement. *Score below grade level on ELA benchmarks. *Grade level meetings to determine individual student placement in AIS programs. *Students who score between a level 2 and a level 3 on a grade 3-6 Math State Assessement. *Grade level meetings to determine individual Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day Grade 1 Fundations Small Group Grade 2 Fundations Grade 3 Ready, Comprehension strategies, Ladders,Fundations, and/or Lexia Grade 4-6 Comprehension Strategies, Ladders,Reading Comprehension through Readworks.org *Grades 3-6- Coach Crosswalk Program and Go Math! Supplemental materials (Reteach materials, RTI activities, Vocabulary activities and ELL Strategies). Small Group During the school day 3 Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) student placement in AIS programs. Needs determined based on science Assessments *Score below NYS determined scale score number on NYS Common Core ELA Assessment *Score below grade level on ELAbenchmarks. *Grade level meetings to determine individual student placement in AIS programs *Need stated on student IEP Smart Science One to one Integrated through ELAAIS Small Group During the school day and at home. During the school day. Guidance Counselor for Special Education Students Individual or Small Group During the school day *Based on teacher articulation ● mandated students *Parent Request ● Crisis intervention *Medical Need ● Counseling for middle school application process ● Nurse-Open Airways Services (grades 3-6) 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 59 students in temporary housing attending our school. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our literacy coach will work closely with the teachers of these students to make sure they have the necessary resources and receive adequate instruction. These students will be targeted by their teachers and monitored by the literacy coach. Students may receive academic, counseling, and other instructional services as needed throughout the school year. The guidance counselor provides outreach to our STH population. He offers supplies to students in need and communicates with the shelter facility in order to ensure that the school is aware of any circumstances that might require attention. In addition, he provides at risk counseling when necessary and communicates with parents often. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) X Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We utilize Open Market to seek highly qualified teachers with experience. The administrative cabinet screens all resumes and looks for highly qualified teachers that share our educational values. The administrative cabinet will as a team interview any prospective teacher and collaboratively decide on the best match for our school. In order to retain highly qualified teachers we will provide a continued supportive school environment where collaboration, commitment, trust, and dedication are fostered. Administrators will conduct frequent cycles of classroom observation and provide effective feedback to develop and refine teacher practice. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our school supports teachers with quality professional development opportunities consistently throughout the year through the development of a refined professional development calendar. This professional development calendar consists of scheduled professional development sessions offered to our teachers in house during our Monday professional development sessions and during scheduled Chancellor's PD Days. Topics covered include but are not limited to mandated areas such as Child Abuse, Nurse's Points, OSHA, Testing Handbook, School Goals, Instructional Focus, Data Cycles, ELL Strategies, Social Emotional Learning, etc. Teachers also attend professional development sessions outside of our school which are sponsored by educational organizations or our field support office. These professional development sessions are geared towards improving their teaching techniques and skills. Administration provides teachers with with ongoing genuine and meaningful feedback to improve and refine delivery of instruction. We provide new teachers with the opportunity to engage in professional dialogue with our literacy coach during our new teacher meetings every Tuesday. Teachers also work closely with our literacy coach throughout the school year and she also serves as a new teacher mentor. The new teacher sessions focus on planning instruction, aligning curriculum, assessments, best practices, etc. Common preparatory periods are purposefully created so that teachers have ample time for teaming and planning. These sessions are crucial in providing continuity of instruction within the grades and in strengthening our teacher teams. Math, Literacy, and Special Education Teams also serve to provide guidance and support for all teachers. Part 3: TA Schools Only 7  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. We will be utilizing the Lexia Core Reading program which provides all students, from at risk to on-level and advanced, a systematic and structured approach to six areas of reading, from phonological awareness to comprehension. The program creates personalized learning paths for each student through an adaptive placement and scaffolded activities that align to Common Core and other rigorous State standards. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Students will have access to the Lexia Core Reading program during the enrichment groupings, as well as at home. Teachers will have access to up to date data reports and student specific resources to provide additional support as needed. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are 8  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) $311,713 $21,846 $12,878 0 $4,848,214 consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A and 5C Section 5A Section 5C Section 5C Sections 5A-5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 9   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Successful students are the result of the partnership of the school and the home. Research has demonstrated that parent involvement contributes to increased academic achievement. P.S. 99 believes this premise and, therefore, facilitates the home-school connection by communicating regularly about their child's progress and individual needs, and by keeping parents informed of the school calendar, programs, and special events. therefore, P.S. 99 is in compliance with Section 1116 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). P.S. 99 aims to keep parents informed by actively involving parents in planning and decision making through our School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee. Participation in these committees is promoted and encouraged consistently throughout the school year. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Our school personnel such as guidance counselor, social worker, psychologist, teachers, parent coordinator,etc will work closely with parents and family members of Title I students as needed to provide ongoing support and to promote a positive home/school connection. A licensed ENL teacher will offer and provide a monthly English as a New Language class to our ENL parents. A parent coordinator is a full-time staff member and is the liaison between the home and the school. Parents are welcome to voice their questions, compliments, and concerns to the parent coordinator. She works to address these topics and to assist parents in meeting their needs. Parents will be provided with language assistance when necessary so close the communication gap. Parents will be provided with many opportunities to participate in parent workshops covering various topics to help them assist their children in improving academically and also how to support their child in becoming a well rounded student. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school will put into operation programs, activities and procedures for the involvement of all parents of Title I, eligible students consistent with Section 1116-Parental Involvement of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). The programs. activities, and procedures will be planned and operated with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children. This policy will be reviewed annually for the purpose of enhancing the school's Title I program. 1  In carrying out the Title I, parent and Family Engagement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of our school's Parent Association including our School Leadership Members have been consulted in regards to this policy. Their feedback was welcomed and considered in the final policy. In an effort to increase and improve parent involvement at our school and overall school environment, P.S. 99 will:  engage families in the planning and review of the Title I program, our Comprehensive Educational plan, and   the School-Parent Compact form a Title I Parent Committee with the purpose of engaging in discussion and decision making around the Title I 1% set aside funds which has been designated for engaging families in school based activities schedule and hold the Annual Title I Parent Meeting before October 31st of each year with the purpose of informing parents of the Title I funded program, their rights, and parental involvement requirements under the Title I, Part A, Section 1116 under ESSA  provide ongoing parent workshops addressing various topics that will support student achievement and provide parental support  provide families with access to our Parent Coordinator who will act as the liaison between our school and our families. Our parent coordinator will organize, manage, and present workshops based on the needs of the parents of children at our school. These workshops will also be in alignment to our school goals. The parent coordinator will make sure all parents needing to communicate in a language other than English are provided with assistance to facilitate communication between the parent and our staff. The parent coordinator will keep logs, calendars, and documentation related to any and all communications, events, and parent workshops. schedule parent workshops such as, How can you advocate for your child?, Preparing your child for the NYS ELA and NYS Math Tests, What bullying is and is not-strategies for prevention, and How to become involved in your child's school.   make available our school website so that parents can access timely information, reminders, and special events information Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement P.S. 99 encourages school-level parental involvement in many areas such as special events, parent workshops, trips, parent-teacher conferences, etc. Parents receive monthly communication via a school calendar, Principal's monthly letter, school website, School Messenger, and school newspaper, "The Buzz". School, district, and citywide notices, are distributed regularly. In addition, parent workshop announcements are sent home in a timely manner. Posters are also displayed notifying parents of this information as well. Parents' Association meetings are held monthly as well as executive board meetings. Agendas are distributed prior to the meeting to inform parents of the topics for discussion. Guest speakers are invited whenever possible to encourage an increase in participation. Parents are always encouraged to be active participants in the school and in their child's education. Teachers communicate often with parents to inform them of their child's academic progress. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S.99 in compliance with the Section 1116 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing our School-Parent Compact (SPC). The purpose of the School Parent Compact is to outline the responsibilities and connection between the home and the school. This agreement, developed in collaboration with parents, ensures that a partnership in education is maintained and that the best interest of all children is consistently served. We at P.S. 99 value a strong home-school connection. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum P.S. 99 will provide students with high quality curriculum and instruction. Students will engage in rigorous instruction and they will receive appropriate services as necessary. Teachers will provide multiple entry points and differentiation based on the needs of students. Students will participate in multiple measures of assessment and teachers will use the data to inform their instruction. All curriculum materials utilized are in alignment to the NYS Next Generation 2  Learning Standards. The instruction will be provided by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, we will notify parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Our parent coordinator will work closely with our parent population to continue to support strong home-school relationships. Our school website will post all notices sent home and will include links to school breakfast and lunch menus. The website will also contain a gallery of special events held throughout the school year, links to web based programs used at our school, and reminders to upcoming meetings and events. Whenever possible verbal and/or written translation services will be provided by members of our school. In addition, School Leadership Team members will represent their constituencies and serve as liaisons between home and school. Parent/Teacher conferences will be held each semester to discuss the progress of students. Additional parent/teacher conferences/meetings will be held during the school year as necessary. Interpretation services will be provided to parents to facilitate communication at meetings. We will disseminate the School-Parent Compact each year. Parents will have reasonable access to staff. Examples include: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Parent-teacher conferences will be held four times a year  Parent Involvement time every Tuesday  Opportunities to meet teachers at a convenient time  Attendance at school level meetings  Opportunities to volunteer  Opportunities to visit their child's class and special events  Interpretation services Parents are provided with general support such as: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents translation services special education referrals guidance, availability of parent coordinator access to parent workshops supporting parental involvement        providing a welcoming environment for all The parent/guardian responsibilities are as follows: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities            to seek out assistance offered by our school or special agencies to in regards to child rearing, teaching, and learning practices to work with their child/children on their homework and sign all homework assignments to read or listen to their child/children read everyday ( K-1 15-30 min) to listen or ensure that their child/children read for 15-30 minutes per day (Grades 2-3). to ensure that their child/children read for 45-60 minutes per day (Grades 4-6). to encourage that their children follow school rules and regulations to discuss School-Parent Compact with their child to communicate with child's teacher as necessary to respond to notices, surveys, and forms as requested to become involved in school meetings and events to participate in parent workshops 3    to participate in the school's Parent Association, Title I Parent Committee, etc to share the responsibility in educating the child Parents are also to monitor the following: television watching attendance at school   punctuality at school  homework   use of electronic devices  healthy habits  health needs  behavior Students at P.S. 99 are expected to: III. Student Responsibilities  Come to school prepared each day and willing to learn  Complete all class assignments and homework in a timely manner  Read at home each night  Attend school each day unless ill  Come to school with punctuality   Be respectful of themselves and others  Always try their best  Try to resolve conflicts or disagreements respectfully and peacefully Follow school and class rules 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 40 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The ENL Title III program for Grades K-2 will meet on Tuesday and Thursday from 7:45 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. in the Annex(before the official start of the school day) . A certified ENL and common branch teacher will service the students in grade K-2 . There are approximately twenty students serviced in this program. The number of students in the program vary due to the fact that newly ENL enrolled student are invited to attend this morning program, however the number at the start of program is twenty. The focus of the intervention is for students to develop a deeper understanding of the structure of English words through the Fundations program . The program integrates listening, speaking, reading and writing which helps our students grasp the language. In addiition, verbal explanations for concepts are enhanced by visual, physical and kinesthetic involvement causing learning through various modalities and helping students maintain their focus. The assessment of content knowledge is performance based rather than language based. In addition, Grades K-2 will be using an technology based program, Imagine Learning, that is tailored to the needs of ENL students. The program focus on oral language, academic vocabulary, instruction in the five essential components of reading and strategic language support. An ENL Title III Program for Gardes 3-6 will meet on Tuesday and Thursday from 7:45 a.m. to 8:30 a.m in the Main Building. These students we will be using a math online program called Spatial Tempural Math (ST MATH). It is a visual based math program that has no language barriers for non english students. ST Math is a game-based instructional software for K-12 and is designed to boost math comprehension and proficiency through visual learning. The ST Math software games use interactive, graphically-rich animations that visually represent mathematical concepts to improve conceptual understanding and problem-solving skills. The program helps students make connections between the visual representations from ST Math and symbolic representations found in their common core instruction. WIth the touch functionality of ST Math students experience an even greater level of interactivity. The ENL teacher and common branch teacher will be funded through Title III funds as indicated on the Title III Program School Building Budget Summary. This service received by the students from the ENL teacher is above and beyond the CR Part 154 mandates. All the ENL students being served in the morning programs receive ENL support during the day by a licensed ENL teacher. This program will have 37 sessions and run from November until April . 6  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Title III ENLteacher provides support to classroom teachers who use these programs in their classroom. The ENL teachers also attend professional development workshops through Network 209. The methodology learned to support the ENL students is shared at Literacy Team meetings, Math Team meetings and grade conferences. Agendas and attendance sheets will be created to keep track of all meetings. An ENL teacher resource room is available with materials that can support the ELL in the classroom. Professional Development that teachers will be provided are: Creating an Interactive Classroom using ELL Strategies; Scaffolds to Help ELL Readers;Accountable Talk; Developing Academic Language,Optimal Conditions for Language Learning; Implementing Imagine Learning in the Classroom for ELL Students,Using data from ST Math/Imagine Learning in the classroom. The meetings will be during common lunch/prep periods and on Mondays from 2:40pm-3:45pm. The professional development delivered will be at no cost to Title III allocations. The professional development is provided every other month and presented by the certified ESL teachers during common preps and Professional Development Mondays. In addition,training for the Spatial Temperal Math Program will be given by the company for the ELL teachers working in the am program and classroom teachers of ELL students. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our school provides activities targeted toward the parents of ENLs in order to impact higher achievement. During parent teacher conferences, which are held twice a year in November and March, we provide interpreters in a variety of languages. Throughout the year workshops are offered by the ELL/Data Specialist and ELL teachers to inform ELL parents of school and state initiatives and programs used to assist students in acquiring the English language. Topics include using NYC School Account to access academic information (Jan 2019), using ST MATH to strengthen Math skills at home(Dec. 2018), How Imagine Learning helps improve student reading skills and information about state testing(Feb 2019). We will constantly be evaluating our workshop themes to meet our parents needs. Parents are informed of these workshops by letters sent home in their language and school messenger in their home language. Parents are offered interpretation services during the workshops. In addition a bimonthly ENL class is provided to all PS99Q ELL parents by a certified ENL teacher. 7 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Two ENL certified teacher Grades K-6 (Tues,Thurs): $3848 (37 sessions of program) Starts: Oct. 23 -March 19 Two Common Branch Teacher( Tues,:Thurs)$3848 (37 sessions of program) Starts: Oct. 23- March 19 Online Spatial Temperal Math and Imagine Learning program for ENL students Refreshments for ELL parents during workshops Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $7696  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $4470 $200.00 $12,366.00 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name PS 99 Borough Queens School Number 099 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Paulette Foglio Coach Mary Iadevaia ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher LaHogue/.Goldberg/ Merino Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Allison Dublin Superintendent Mabel Sarduy Assistant Principal Aida Trujillo /Nick Sforza Coach type here School Counselor James Reid Parent type here Parent Coordinator Barbara Maier-Hopkins Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics 9  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 811 Total number of ELLs 99 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.21% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Lang. N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools our school uses to assess early literacy skills of our ELLS are: Leapfrog, Reading benchmark assessments,Fundations and CKLA assessments. These results are shared with the ENL teachers in order to plan appropriate instruction for all levels of ENLs. This information coincides with the results from the NYSESLAT. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ELL teachers meet with the classroom teachers on a regular basis to discuss the results of the curriculum assessments. They are common preps within the schoolwide schedule to enable this to take place. In addition, the ENL teacher sends a curriculum planning sheet to classroom teachers to fill out so that ENL instruction can be aligned with classroom instruction. 0  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The summative assessments that are used include the Reading Assessment Inventory and Math Assessment Inventory. They are administered in the Fall to give teachers information about areas of their students strengths and weaknesses. They are readministered in the Spring to determine student progress. The same is done using the Reading benchmark assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have a designated enrichment period within our school schedule that the ENL students receive their mandated services. The ENL teachers schedules are created with the school principal to make sure ENL students receive support needed. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In grades K-6 we use the results from Fundations, Reading Benchmark Assessments, NYSESLAT, and MAI(Mathematics Achievement Indicator)/RAI (Reading Achievement Indicator) scores to place students in the appropriate tiered intervention services. Our ELL Tier 2 students have an AM Leapfrog and Math program that is taught by a licensed ENL teacher. After the designated time frame for the Tier 2 intervention, students are then reassessed. If students qualify for Tier 3 intervention, they are then placed in a small group for instruction with a special education teacher during the school day. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After analyzing the data from the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT we have learned that a high percentage of our students are on the Transitioning and Expanding level. There were a total of 99 students that took the NYSESLAT 2016: 22% of students are on Entering level, 12% of students on Emerging level, 34% of students on Transitioning level; 32% of students on Expanding level and 17% of students on Commanding level. The students in grades K-6 have greater deficiency in writing and reading than in oral skill development. The ENL teachers will put more focus on reading and writing skills to help improve the ENL students skills and move them to the Commanding level. We also have a large number of students on the entering level. Our ENL teachers are focusing more on oral language skills with these students. Computer based programs are being used in classrooms to help these students acquire language skills. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ELL teachers are constantly meeting with the classroom teachers to discuss their students in order to plan curriculum. Teachers on the same grade have common preps which enables the ELL teacher to meet with them in a group setting. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ENL students are grouped heterogeneously. In grades K-6 Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding students will be grouped together for one period according to their grade during the scheduled enrichment program. The enrichment period at PS99 occurs daily and is the time that all students receiving AIS reading or math; ENL /TAG/Enrichment get pulled from their class. The remainder of mandated instructional time will be provided for students by grade level grouping: grades 3/4 and grades 5/6. The ENL teacher will emphasize content instruction in science,social studies and math in congruence with the grade curriculum, CCLS and ENL standards and collaborative 1  teaching. More emphasis will be placed on writing and reading within the content area, since these areas present the most difficulty for our ELL students, based on the current data. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ESL teachers are dually certified so they are able to provide the appropriate instructional minutes for all ENL students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers will scaffold academic language to content areas to support ENL instructional strategies. A variety of materials will be used to support the learning of ENLs, such as realia, print, visual media and technology. For example, the Go Math intervention kit is used as an instructional tool for math content teaching. National Geographic for social studies and science content books are also used. P.S. 99 will be in continued compliance with the Core Curriculum and utilize ENL intervention kits and guided reading books for differentiated instruction during the school day. Students’ literacy in their native language will be taken into consideration, as books in several native languages are placed in classrooms. In addition, given the demands of the CCLS ENL teachers will continue to develop critical thinking skills. Teachers will strive to reach higher DOK levels of thinking. ENL students in need of AIS services receive instruction in an AM program with 2 certified ENL teachers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At PS 99 we have staff that is fluent in many languages(Spanish, Russian, Hebrew, Urdu, Arabic). They are available to assist in evaluating a new admit. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students, who have experienced interruption in their formal education, will be provided with extra support from reading and math AIS teachers. They will be given opportunities to attend educational programs both before and after school. Currently our school has no SIFE students. b. ELL students in U.S. schools less than three years will receive similar services as the SIFE students in order to acquire English language proficiency within 3 years. They will be given explicit frameworks for reading, writing, speaking and listening. The ENL teachers will provide individual support within their mainstreamed groups to develop language acquisition and learning strategies that will prepare them to think critically and to function more effectively in their classrooms. These students will also be using Imagine Learning/Leapfrog/ ST Math to assist them in acquiring different reading and math skills. c. The ELL students receiving services for 4-6 years will receive support through SIOF instructional methodology by the ENL teacher. They will also be using Leapfrog, ST Math and a web-based program IMindplay to assist them in acquiring different reading and math skills. d. Long-term ELLs will receive continuing transitional support within and outside of the classroom. These students will be invited to an AM program to assist them in their individual needs. e. Students identified as ENL with special needs according to SBST identification are fully serviced. Service providers, i.e. self- contained special education teacher,resource or speech teachers, in conjunction with the ENL teacher ,determine 2  guidelines for language acquisition. IEPs will reflect an achievable aim or goal to develop language. f. Former ELL’s are placed in AIS groups(based on assessment results) and receive extra time on state tests. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our ENL teachers use a variety of instructional strategies and grade level materials with their students. Many of the classroom programs come with ENL components which are utilized by classroom teachers to assist their ENL students. ENL teachers use National Geographic and web-based programs to provide students with access to academic areas based on their abilities. Leapfrog is also used to provide immediate feedback to the students on their reading/math skills and enable the teacher to use data to drive instruction. Smartboards are used to develop language by enabling students to manipulate the board and have tactile experiences. They also have a variety of discussions based on the lesson. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ENLs are serviced during their grade level AIS/Enrichment period, a time when all students are receiving instruction based on their academic needs. This ensures ELL's are not missing classroom instruction. In addition, an articulation form is given to all classroom teachers in order to provide continuety and consistency in ELL instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. There is a Math AM program offered to ELL students in need of extra support. This program uses picture cues so newly admits can easily improve their math skills. For ELA, Leapfrog is used in morning program as well as the classroom for student in need of extra support. In addition, Imagine Learning a web-based program is used by our entering and emerging students to assist them with acquiring language skills. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? A computer based program Lexia 3000 will be used year to assist students in improving their ELA skills. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ENL students are afforded equal access to all school programs. Applications for after school activities are provided to all students at PS 99. Students in need of extra support based on State ELA/Math test and NYSESLAT are invited to AM programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials used to support ELLs are the following: Web-based Discovery Education, Smartboard, Computer based Leapfrog program , Mindplay , ABCmouse (entering/emerging K-2 students), Imagine Leaning(entering/emerging 3-6 students) and ST MATH. Skill oriented books are used in grades 3-6 to assist the ENL students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ENL teachers use support in the native language to assist the students in acquiring English. Our ENL teacher is fluent in Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ENL teachers provide classroom teachers with an articulation form that is filled out stating the content being taught in the classroom. The ENL teacher uses the information to plan lessons that correspond to the ENL's ages and grade levels. In addition, ENL teachers select high interest age appropriate materials to supplement within their ENL classes. 3  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). When students enroll at the end of the previous school year, the ENL teacher meets with the parents and student to assess his/her ELL status. However, those students that enroll during the summer months the ENL teacher is not informed until they return to work. When teachers return in September they assess all the new admits to determine their ELL status. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ELL teachers will be attending a series of workshops on the Common Core Standards and Teacher Effectiveness. The tentative schedule/topics of PD for all staff is as follows: September: Working with Entering ENL students in your classroom; November: How teachers can create an interactive classroom with ENL strategies; January: Reading strategies to assist our ENL students in the classroom; March: Scaffolding strategies for our Entering-Transitioning ENL students. In addition, our ENL teachers will attend workshops given by common branch/special needs teachers on questioning techniques, using data to assess students, utilizing smartboards in ELL classes, and UDL strategies . These workshops will offer the ENL teachers professional development in areas that will assist them in their delivery of instruction. The ENL teachers attend monthly grade meetings to inform classroom teachers of ENL strategies that can be incorporated into their classes. Our teachers are given the opportunity to attend District/Citywide Workshops. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers will attend training to enhance their teaching skills in order to provide the most appropriate education to our ENL students. ELL workshops will be conducted throughout the year to all staff by certified ENL teachers. A sign in sheet will be used to maintain attendance records. 4  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are always invited to come and speak to their child's ENL teacher. Tuesday afternoons are designated for parents to make appointments with their child's ENL teacher to discuss their child's language development and areas that are still in need of improvement. In our school there are teachers/paras that are able to assist with translations when needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents including ELL parents will be encouraged to participate in all activities in the school. The school provides workshops throughout the year to inform parents of different programs or assessments. We insure that every parent has the capacity to communicate with the school at all times. ENL classes to improve language acquistion are offered to parents throughout the school year. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Paulette Foglio, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 99 School DBN: 28Q099 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Paulette Foglio Title Principal Aida Trujillo/Nick Sforza Assistant Principal Barbara Maeir-Hopkins Parent Coordinator Goldberg/ LaHogue/ Merino M. Iadevaia James Reid Allison Dublin ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related Services Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 06/30/17 1/1/01 06/30/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 06/30/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 28Q099 School Name: PS99 Superintendent: Mabel Sarduy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Sara Goldberg Data Specialist Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The need for written translations and oral interpretations is based on the current School Profile, the review of the ATS Otelle report and the RHLEA ATS report. New admits are surveyed to determine which languages are needed for translations for their parents/caregivers through the use of the Home Language Survey. In addition, the parent coordinator outreaches to parents to assess if another language is needed for parent letters. Requests made by the Guidance Counselor, Office Staff and Teachers also provide us with information about the need for translations. We also make use of the NYC Language Identification Guide in identifying native languages in our school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 8  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Russian Albanian Arabic Bengali Chinese Hebrew Hindi Indonesian Mandarin Japanese Korean Punjabi Polish English Spanish Russian Albanian Arabic Bengali Chinese Hebrew Hindi Indonesian Mandarin Japanese Korean Punjabi Polish Romanian Romanian Sign Language Sign Language Tadzhik Urdu Ukrainian Uzbek Tadzhik Urdu Ukranian Uzbek 82.32 9.59 1.67 .18 1.58 .62 .79 0 .26 .09 0 .26 .45 .09 .0 0 .18 .09 1.23 .53 .09 933 111 19 2 18 7 5 1 3 1 2 3 5 2 1 1 2 1 16 5 1 82.06 9.76 1.58 .18 1.5 .62 .44 .09 .26 .09 .18 .26 .44 .18 .09 .09 .18 .09 1.41 .44 .09 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NONE Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families calendars, Monthly newsletters Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All the parent information documents are scanned and placed on the PS 99 9  newsletters, parent teacher conference notices, afterschool information and curriculum overviews November/March parent teacher conferences... N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A website. A web-based program translates them according to language needed.In addition for noc-cover languages we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word." N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Tuesday parent meetings parent teacher conferences (Nov/March). N/A N/A N/A Weekly meetings November/March N/A N/A N/A interpretation service(s)? a translator will be provided if the parent requests it. When needed the parent coordinator will contact parents to assist them with any language issues and we will use the over-the-phone interpretation services offered by the DOE. N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In event of a school emergency we have various paras that speak the languages of our ENL students and are able to contact parents as needed. We also have a phone message that is sent out to all students in our school. In additionwe will use over-the-phone interpretation services provided by the DOE. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Teachers at PS 99 are informed which students in their class have parents that don't speak English. When teachers are meeting with these parents they are able to have a para come in and translate for them. If no one speaks the language then the teacher will use the over-the-phone interpretation services provided by the DOE. In addition, 0  training during common preps/lunch/Monday afternoons will be provided to teachers on the interpretation and translation services provided by the DOE. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school informs parents the they are entitled to language interpretation assistance at Parent Association Meetings, ENL orientations and School Leadership Team meetings. The language assistance can take the form of written translation or oral interpretations. In addition, a sign posted by the main entrance will inform parents that they are entitled to language services. The Department of Education website also informs the parents of their right to language services. The Parent Coordinator can also arrange for translation or interpretation services for any meetings, as needed. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Annually our parents fill out a parent survey in their native language. When results are final we review it to evaluate the feedback. After reviewing the feedback we initiated an ENL class for our limited proficiency parents. 1 
