 29Q109 School Name: JEAN NUZZI INTERMEDIATE SCHOOL Principal: KARLEEN ADAM-COMRIE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Jean NuzziIS 109 342900010109 6-8 School Number (DBN): 29Q109 213-10 92 ND AVENUE QUEENS VILLAGE NY 11428 718-465-0651 718-264-1246 Phone Number: Fax: KARLEEN ADAM-COMRIE KADAM@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: KARLEEN ADAM-COMRIE MELISSA DUNN-WALL ANNA BASSOO MELISSA DUNN-WALL SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): LULA FISHER N/A SPORTS AND ARTS SCHOOL FOUNDATION BEACON CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 29 Superintendent’s Office Address: Beverly Mitchell Superintendent: 191-02 90th AvenueJamaica NY 11423 Bmitche2@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-217-7740 Phone Number: 94QFSS FSC: 718-217-7739 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) MARLENE WILKS Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 82-01 ROCKAWAY BLVD, QUEENS NY 11416 MWILKS@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name KARLEEN ADAM-COMRIE MELISSA DUNN-WALL ANNA BASSOO LULA FISHER ALISE WILLIAMS-DAVIS KAREN ORCHOWSKI DAVID HAIMOVICH Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ TEACHER Member/ TEACHER Member/ TEACHER   Name QUENTIN MEZENTIN MARIE JOSEPH ROBERT GUBELMAN Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? VISION STATEMENT We, the community of Jean Nuzzi Intermediate School 109, will provide students with a deep conceptual understanding of academic success and personal ownership in preparation for future global opportunities.   MISSION STATEMENT The mission of Jean Nuzzi Intermediate School 109, in partnership with the community, is to provide a rigorous education while meeting the needs of all students. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We provide a quality education that maximizes student potential by: supporting the standards driven instructional programs for all students; fostering positive self-images, respect, and the development of social skills in a nurturing atmosphere; encouraging awareness and appreciation for a culturally diverse environment; supporting a variety of academic programs and services which help to build excellence; using a diagnostic prescriptive approach at meeting individual needs; preparing students to compete in highly technological societies. We offer our students NYS standards based core curriculum in English Language Arts, Math, Science, Social Studies. In addition to the core academic subjects the following are also provided: Mock Trial Team : · support and build confidence in students who have career goals, but do not believe that they can attain them. · present students with challenging lessons designated to reveal their true capabilities. · teach students positive methods of conflict resolution. · play an active role in nurturing students and fostering teamwork, dedication and public speaking skills. This program teaches our students about the history of law which helps them to gain a better sense of how the government works. Students are also able to contemplate current issues in society that they are interested in or concerned about. This program supports our Social Studies curriculum by allowing students to apply content they have learned to real life. Our Entrepreneurship Program helps students learn business concepts, and practice skills including negotiation and pricing. They also work on the completion of business plans for their own individual businesses. Students have the opportunity to put their business savvy into action during our yearly Entrepreneurship Sales Event which generates a lot of excitement, not only with our Entrepreneurship students but with all students and staff. We offer a one year academic prep class specifically geared to equip 6th and 7th graders with the needed skills to increase their scores on the NYC Specialized High School exam given in October of their 8th grade year. This program will help to increase the amount of students that are accepted to Specialized High Schools. Visual Art 0  Students in Art classes follow the NYC Art blueprint which includes: media perspective, painting, drawing, sketching and artistic design. Students’ artwork is displayed throughout the building which helps to build students’ self-esteem and school pride. Music Students in Music classes follow the NYC Art Blueprint which includes: play a melody with simple harmonic accompaniment, read and perform sophisticated rhythmic phrases, demonstrate knowledge of musical elements such as dynamic, tempo, and articulation through performance. Dance Students in Dance classes follow the NYC blueprint which includes: exploring, creating, replicating and observing dance, students build their artistry and unique personal voice in dance and experience the power of dance to communicate. They will learn the universal language and legacy of expression in every culture. We offer our students who qualify the opportunity to earn High School credit by taking the following regents and proficiency courses. By providing these courses in middle school, our students are a step ahead when they enter high school. We have a high success rate for passing these exams which affords students in the twelfth grade to take college credit courses: Living Environment Common Core Algebra 1 Partnerships We have made several partnerships to enrich the social and emotional, as well as, the academic growth of all our students: Our Entrepreneurship Program helps our students learn business concepts, and practice skills including negotiation and pricing. They also work on the completion of business plans for their own individual businesses. The IS 109 Beacon Program offers our students a wide variety of services that include: academic enrichment, youth development, sports, fitness and wellness activities, visual and performing arts and community service programs. C.H.A.M.P.S offers our students additional opportunities, regardless of athletic ability, to engage in a wide variety of physical activities, and to encourage students to find activities that they enjoy and can participate in for life. In addition we offer: A prep class-to help prepare students for the Living Environment Regents. and Common Core Algebra Regents Boys and Girls Mentoring Clubs where students learn about various cultures, build self-esteem, leadership skills, community service and social skills. Students will also attend Broadway plays 1  and restaurants to experience cultural foods and arts and take additional educational trips.. Debate Team-obtained throughout the years 60 awards overall: The has team 3rd place in school performance and have had 1st place in team performance as well. Our Co-Ed Track Team has won over 50 medals and 2 trophies throughout the years. This program has helped to motivate those involved to strive to work harder in their academia. Our school choir provides students who are interested in music to showcase their singing talents. All students interested in singing are welcomed to join the school choir. Monthly College and Career Readiness Activities Each month our students are engaged in different activities based on the focus for the month in relation to college and career readiness. All students participate in these activities each month to support college awareness. Last year teachers and administrators decorated their classroom and office doors to highlight the college they attended. This helped to generate excitement amongst students and to open up opportunities for conversations about different colleges and the programs that are offered. Instructional Focus Our instructional focus for the 2018-19 school year is four tiered: 1) Student Engagement-all students will engage in accountable talk and group activities in their content area classes. 2) Writing across the content areas that is informed by data. 3) Multiple Access Entry Points – Students will be based on their individual abilities by differentiating supports that are evident in the teachers planning and classroom observations. 4) Using formative and summative assessment to further improve the quality of instruction for all students. Strengths/Growth We offer a full complement of Special Education programs and have a history of success with moving students to less restrictive classes. In addition, we had 100% passing rate in our Algebra 1 Regents class. The majority of our classrooms integrate the use of technology to reinforce the academic learning process: Smartboards, Ipads, chrome books and laptops activities are incorporated in the lessons to engage, motivate and provide multiple entry points for all students. Area of Challenge: Our students continue to work towards improving their skills needed for High School; however our self-contained students continue to struggle in ELA and math. We hope that through the addition of our Saturday Success Academy and our Max Scholar and Achieve 3000 reading program and ST Math which supports reading and math in the content areas that we can further close this achievement gap. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2  Our students with disabilities have a diverse needs which includes academic intervention in math and ELA. Students will utilize Maxscholar and Rewards. Students with disabilities are in need of a nurturing environment and academic rigor. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As per the Framework for Great Schools we have made the most progress in the area of rigorous instruction in comparison to prior years, but more specifically quality of student discussions. The area of focus for this school year more specifically is inviting parents to visit classrooms and observe instruction. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q109 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1108 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 70 73 24 14 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 13 13 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 67.0% % Attendance Rate 60.7% % Reduced Lunch 7.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.5% 19.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.86 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 46.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 70 68 93.5% 5.7% 14.5% 39.5% 33.2% 3.8% 8 21% 9.6 27.6% 46% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A NO YES NO NO N/A NO NO NO NO N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After reviewing our Great School Framework SY 2017-18 report, our strengths are in the element of rigorous instruction-quality discussion. The Great School Framework has identified teachers asking difficult questions in class and on exams as an area of priority. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Throughout the 2018-19 school year, teachers will be consistent with increasing opportunities for student discussion in all content areas as well as assessing students understanding and provide feedback to students on their work. By June 2019 , teachers measurement in domain "3b- Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques" and "Using Assessment for Instruction", will show a gain of 5% in progress as measured by MOTP. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will provide students opportunities to answer more rigorous questions in in class and on exams. Teachers will continue to provide opportunities for accountable talk, group discussion and pair-share in order to be successful in all content areas. Teachers will assess students growth on a consistent basis. A PowerPoint presentation reviewing the grading policy expectation and instructional focus will be presented to all staff members. Implementation of PBIS, which includes rigorous question, rigorous assessments, quality conversation, accountable talk, active listening, being productive, actively participating and being attentive. PD will be given on the following topics: Discussion techniques, as well as intervisitation for modeling strategies to promote rigorous questioning, student discussion, student engagement, data-driven instruction, analyzing data, differentiated instruction (Multiple Access Entry), Universal Design for Learning and Assessment Collaborative Assessment Conference modifications, Language Acquisition for the ELL’s, Strategies to Support SWD’s and on-going Professional Developments to support. Create a schedule of snapshots/observations: Instructional quality will be consistently monitored (weekly-informally and monthly-formally) to determine if assessment are rigorous and if assessment modifications across multiple content areas have been broadened to include ELL’s, AIS students and Special Education students and also to ensure that their learning styles and academic needs are being met. After-School ELL's Program using ESL math book by REA and ELA. Saturday Success Academy-Academic Intervention Program for lowest third and those in need, using I-ready books for all grades Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, Assistant Principal, MSQI Coach and Academic Consultant All Teachers and Para’s Sept. to Nov. 2018 Nov. 2018 to Feb 2019 Feb to April 2019 April to June 2019 All Teachers , Para’s, Ell’s Student, AIS students Sept. to Nov. 2018 Principal, Assistant Principal, MSQI Coach, Educators for Student Success Nov. 2018 to Feb 2019 Feb to April 2019 6 & programs for Achieve 3000 for grade 7, Maxscholar for SWD, Imagine Learning for our English Language Learners for all grades. Saturday Success Academy-SHSAT Prep Class using Kaplan Test Prep and Admission Course Book SHSAT April to June 2019 All parents Sept. to June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Parents, Teachers, and Learning Leader Facilitator, PBIS team Parent Involvement- Provide workshops for parents held by Parent Coordinator Workshop for Pupil Path by Datacation Presenter Inviting parents to visit classroom and observe instruction Increase Parent Leaders certification Phone messenger of important letters and meetings Reminder phone messenger for Tuesday parent teacher conferences. PBIS presentation and letters informing parents what will be done throughout the school year. In order for us to build trust all staff members, parents and students to work together to achieve and improve students outcome, as per the instructional focus 2018-2019 school year. All faculty, parents and students Sept. to June 2019 All Teachers, Students, Parents and Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited for workshops around rigorous instruction and common core. We will have a curriculum night to present information pertaining to content curriculum for parents. The workshop will take place starting October 2018 on Saturdays ending May 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, Assistant Principal, Parents, Parent Coordinator, MSQI Coach, Educators for Student Success will provide PD's and materials for teachers to reinforce rigorous questioning in class and on assessments. MSQI Coach will provide support on a monthly basis and workshops will be provided on Monday afternoon. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A 7  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored on Advance with a 5% in questioning and discussion techniques also assessment in instruction by January 2019. Snapshots/Observations of all teachers All of the above targets will be met by Mid year, February 2019. Teachers will show gains in the area of 3b-questioning and discussion techniques in and assessment in instruction 3e-as documented in the Advance rating system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The Degrees of writing power is used to measure the progress students. As our midyear point our students will show a 5% progression in the DRP results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the results of our Framework for Great Schools Report and SY 2016-17 Quality Review, our strengths are in the areas of effective teaching and learning, instructional core and our school culture. According to our Framework for Great Schools Report, student feel that they don't get teachers support when they are upset. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Throughout the 2018-19 school year, teachers will increase the number of students who feel supported by 5% as measured by our Learning Environment Survey. Throughout the 2018-19 school year, teachers and students will continue to be trained with PBIS initiative to improve student -to -student, student-to-teacher academic support that will increase teacher student relationships, peer support for social emotional well being, academic work and provide feedback to students on their work. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will increase opportunities for student interaction with one another. Teachers will help students to feel more supportive when they are upset. All students Dec. to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Dean, Teachers, and SAPIS School-wide implementation of PBIS will help encourage a positive school climate. The goals and objectives for PBIS are: - to help students know what is expected of them and choose to be positive. - to learn the skills, know what to do, and obtain the natural benefits for acting responsibly. - to allow adults and students the opportunity to have more time to focus on relationships and classroom instruction. - to learn that there is an instructional approach to discipline. Instances of problem behaviors, opportunities to learn, and to practice prosocial behavior. The school wide expectations are the P’s and Q’s, which are to: - Be Positive - Be Productive - Be Professional ...while also maintaining: - Quality conversations - Quality relationships 0  The system for explicitly teaching and modeling the P's and Q's of PBIS is a school-wide behavioral expectation. Brain Power will be implemented school wide to further support students social emotional needs and provide equity amongst students. All teachers will be trained at the beginning of the school year. Student verses Faculty Bi-Yearly Basketball Game Each class will identify the college of choice and decorate their classroom doors to reflect the college I-Safe is a state approved curriculum to help bring awareness to all children of the various types of bullying that takes place, and how to protect themselves from being bullied. We show our students a monthly presentation from the I-Safe series. In addition to supporting our anti-bullying campaign, we will host a Fall 2018 Bullying Free, Absentee Free and Drug (BAD)-Carnival Fair, which will help our students become increasingly aware of what bullying can lead to, and how victims of bullying feel. Students will also acquire knowledge on how to stay away from drugs, as well as learning how to cope with anxieties and stress in our Suicidal Prevention Program. In turn, both programs will raise awareness to all stake holders about related issues, and to keep students safe from harm. - Our College Readiness Monthly Theme helps to encourage and prepare students for the process of applying to colleges and researching their particular field of interest. - Morning refreshers using the book of Energizing Brain Breaks during morning announcements. According to David Sladkey, the author of Energizing Brain Breaks, activating the brain with one-to-two minute activities helps boost a positive attitude, relieves stress and promotes student efficiency in the classroom. We also provide a bilingual guidance counselor in case parents/guardians need someone to speak to. Staff and parent volunteers are available to translate when necessary. Students with Disabilities have the opportunity to see their guidance counselor whenever necessary, as well as our SAPIS, Deans and Administrators when needed. All students participate in all activities in order to support the academic environment. Parents assisting with the activities in the school. The Parent Coordinator provides relevant workshops for parents. Phone Messenger and Skedula are a means of direct contact with All students Dec. to June 2019 Teachers, Dean, SAPIS, Students Principal and AP’s All students Oct. to June 2019 SAPIS, Dean teachers and AP’s 1 teachers, informing parents of school-based activities. Workshops for parents on PBIS as well. All staff members, parents and students are working together to achieve and improve students' perception on feeling safe, as well as learning to trust their teachers, and one another All students, Jan. to March 2019 Staff and parents Principal, School Psychologists, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Assistant Principals, Dean, Teachers, and SAPIS 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Presentation of PBIS and Brain Power will be done four times a year in order for parents to understand how the school supports positive behavior and how they can support their children at home to reinforce positive behavior. The committee is made up of an Administrator, School Base Support Team, Teachers and Students. PBIS is implemented daily at the school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PBIS/Brain Power training which include copies, posters, letters to parents and workshop outside the building and in school. It will require coverages and per session for teachers. Team presentation to parents after school as well as training student PBIS Ambassadors. Setting up activities for students and teachers to interact on a social level. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Quarterly surveys will be given to assess students perception of school environment and project an increase of 5% demonstrated by student survey results by January 2019. Survey will be given quarterly and reviewed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Quarterly Surveys and Learning Environment Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After analyzing the Framework for Great Teachers, the Quality Review and School Survey we indicated our strength are inclusive awareness, inclusive classroom instruction and peer collaboration. The area of growth based on the Framework for Great Teachers is in the area of the quality of professional development more specifically opportunities for teachers to work with teachers of other schools. Also, improving the assessment we use to measure students progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 50% teachers will participate in inter-visitation and common planning. The initiative will lead towards the improvement regarding best practices and constructive feedback of what has been observed. Teachers will construct formative assessment that is measuring the unit of the study and use the data to improve student academic outcome. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will have opportunities in whole group, small group and individual sessions to reflect on students learning styles, access entry and goals in all content areas. Teacher Cluster team meetings will review students work, student’s data and assessments to formulate actionable next steps. Teachers will meet in grade level and cross functional teacher teams to review student data gathered from class assessment. Parental engagement on Tuesdays will enable collaboration between parents and teachers to work towards the common goal of higher student outcomes. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept. to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Teachers Sept. to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal and Teacher In order to continue to build a school culture based on trust, collaboration and respect, school leaders have open door policies Teachers Sept. to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal and Teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Presentation of the importance of parent -teachers collaboration will be presented twice a year to parents. The Parent Coordinator will continue to support this collaboration by hosting activities for parent and teachers to engage in together. The Parent Coordinator will conduct a parent-teacher collaboration seminar twice during the school year during the month of September and February. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. MSQI Coaches, TRIAD Consultant and Borough Field School Support Center Materials to support Professional Developments and classroom implementation Coverage for Teachers going to Professional Developments outside of the school. Books for teachers; Teach Like a Champion and Energizing Brain Breaks and Making Thinking Invisible. 4  National School Reform faculty Resource Book and Video will be used to improve teacher teams protocols. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A review of the 2018-19, Measurement of Teacher Observation (MOTP) in Advance and Teacher Observation has been reviewed to re-evaluate areas in need of improvement as well as growth. Students engagement and work ethics will be measured through surveys and observations. In February we will show a 5% growth in the MOTP area of student engagement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance MOTP will be used to measure progress. Midpoint has shown improvements in teachers growth in MOTP. The yearly Learning Environment survey will show an increase teacher collaboration with teachers of other schools and an increase of parent and teacher collaboration. If in the event that an minimum of 3% growth is not seen midpoint( February 2019) using Charlotte Danielson, the professional planning committee will provide additional training to teachers. Improvement of this goal is based on a 10% increase on teacher collaboration using the Danielson Framework assessment tool. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Quality Review indicates that one of our strength is that we identify, track for progress and accelerate student learning. As a result students have a better understanding of what is expected of them and learn to monitor their own academic progress. Based on the results of the Framework for Great Schools, we have identified that teachers do not feel they have enough influence over school policy in the area of selecting instructional materials used in the classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% growth of teacher satisfaction with their influence over school policy as measured by the School Learning Environment Survey. 6 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? New Staff, and Parents Sept. to June 2019 Admin, Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will engage in the review of resumes and interviewing new prospects for hire. Teachers take part in assisting to make decision that affects the school and sharing ideas of ways to promote parent engagement within the school. Teachers will be invited to join the professional committee, Instructional Committee, and Instructional Visitation. In order to encourage an all-inclusive environment all students are invited to participate in programs that they are interested in. This will help their social skills and learn about each other’s cultures. Partnerships have been formed with Centre Stage program, MSQI Debate team, Champs (Track Team and Fitness Club) and a host of other clubs based on students survey. In order to continue to build a school culture based on trust, we meet with the student government monthly to discuss the students request and ideas for the school. All As research based results found from Educational Leadership on “Research link/Extracurricular Activities and Student Motivation, it indicates that extracurricular activities “foster a more cooperative environment, and may therefore encourage students to stay in and complete school”, as per the study done by R. McNeal. Secondly, the study done by Mahoney and Cains results “discovered that a wider choice of activities resulted in a stronger effect because students’ individual needs and interest were more likely to be met.” 3b – Parent and Family Engagement (Quarterly) All students Sept to June 2019 (Quarterly) All students Sept. to Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator , teachers, parents Principal, Assistant Principal Assistant Principal, Teacher and students June 2019 (Quarterly) Sept. to June 2019 (Quarterly) How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 7  We will have parent committee represented on all grades to work with teachers and administrators on how we can further improve relationships and empower parents to share ideas collaboratively with the Principal and staff members. We will provide workshops for parents quarterly ( Sept. Nov., Nov to Feb., Feb to April, and April to June 2019) on how to engage and support their children academically. Provide parents with opportunities to volunteer in the school. In addition, a pilot program PPIS (Positive Parental Involvement Support) will entail parent workshop, parent volunteering, parent on patrol (POP) and Parent Teacher Conferences to support parental engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher volunteers to formulate teams. Per session pay for teachers, materials for the programs, trips and parent volunteers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February, 2019 a midpoint house survey will be administered to determine if teachers and parents are satisfied with number of programs and academic policies in the school. We anticipate a growth of satisfaction midpoint, February 2019 of 3%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In house survey will be used to measure the progress with engagement Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the results of our 2017-18 , School Performance Dashboard, data shows that our parents have not had enough opportunities to volunteer at school. Our strength from the data from the 2016-17 Framework for Great Schools Report data shows our school strength is in the area of outreach to parents, school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will show an increase of 5% parent volunteerism in schoolwide events on the learning environment survey. This will reflect a 2% increase by the end of February 2019 (midyear), and an additional 3% by the end of June 2019. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Coordinator, SAPIS Worker, Guidance Counselor, PTA president and Teachers will outreach to parents to volunteer at school events and other academic programs. All parents Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Guidance Counselor, Assistant Principals, Dean, Teachers, and SAPIS Implementation of PBIS school wide will help encourage a positive school climate. The goals and objective for PBIS are: -to help students to know what is expected of them and choose to be positive. -to learn the skills, know what to do, and obtain the natural benefits for acting responsibly. -allow adults and students to have more time to focus on relationships; and classroom instruction. -learn that there is an instructional approach to discipline. Instances of problem behaviors, opportunities to learn and practice prosocial behavior. -The school wide expectations are the P’s and Q’s which are to: Be positive Be productive Be professional Quality conversation Quality relationships This system for teaching behavior is for everyone school wide. Student verses Faculty Bi-Yearly Basketball Game 0 Principal, School Psychologists, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Assistant Principals, Dean, Teachers, and SAPIS Quarterly student surveys will be created by Student Government I-Safe is a state approved curriculum to help bring awareness to all children of the various types of bullying that takes place and how to protect themselves from being bullied. We show our student a monthly presentation from the I-Safe series. In addition, to support our anti-bullying campaign we will host a fall 2018 Bullying Free, Absentee Free and Drug (BAD)-Carnival Fair it will help our students become aware of what bullying can lead to and how victims of bullying feel. As well as staying away from drugs Suicidal Prevention Program will bring awareness to all state holders about related issues and to keep students safe from harm. -College Readiness Monthly Theme helps to encourage and prepare students for the process of applying to colleges and researching the field of interest. -The Book of Virtues, is used every morning to emphasize character development, students read a poem every morning schoolwide, in order to promote positive behavior and character. All students Oct. to June 2019 (Quarterly) October 2018-June 2019 Daily from Sept. 2018 to June 2019 We also provide a bilingual guidance counselor in case they ever need someone to speak to. Staff and parent volunteers are available to translate when necessary. Students with Disabilities have the opportunity to see their guidance counselor whenever necessary as well as our SAPIS, Dean and Administrators when needed. All students participate in all activities in order to support the academic environment. Parents assisting with the activities in the school. Parents Coordinator provides workshop for parents. Phone messenger and Skedula are means of direct contact with teachers, informing parents of school activities. Parents As Reading Partners Program is designed to encourage children to read together with their parents/guardians for 30 minutes. We provide the PTA is also has parent workshops on Saturdays to support parents understanding. All students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Teachers, Dean, SAPIS, Students Principal and AP’s All students Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Teachers, Dean, SAPIS, Students Principal and AP’s Oct. 2018-June 2019 1  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our partnership with TRIAD will continue to support families and community engagement with school and parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Purchase of books for parents book club, TRIAD will provide workshops as well as the Parent Coordinator and providing parents with a PARP Handbook. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 an increase will show of 3% parent volunteering will be shown through attendance. Parent volunteer is less than 2% as of right now as they await their certification for Learning Leaders. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Learning Environment Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students state exam scores, assessment performed in class, as well as students DRP results. AlS, as per the recommendation of content teachers Students state exam scores, assessment performed in class, as well as students DRP results. AlS, as per the recommendation of content teachers Science Students are targeted based on (MOSL) Measure of Student Learning in Science results. AlS, as per the recommendation of content teachers Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Saturday Success Program is a key resource for our at risk students. Students will be engaged in reading, writing, Max Scholar and vocabulary development. We are also using Achieve 3000 for our 7th grade students. Saturday Success Academy is a key resource for our at risk students. On Saturdays students are paired into groups and are supported by content specialist and are rotated from ELA to Math. This is designed to enable teachers to address targeted skills using I-ready Math materials. One-to-one instructional tutoring is provided. ILSET Parent Workshop is used to support parents of AIS students When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) On Saturdays students attend Saturday Academy for AIS services using Maxscholar,Imagine Learning and Rewards On Saturdays students attend Saturday Academy & for AIS services. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Students are paired into groups and are supported by content specialist and are rotated from ELA to Math. This is designed to enable teachers to address targeted skills. Students are paired into groups and are supported by content specialist and are rotated from ELA to Math. This is designed to enable teachers to address targeted skills. During lunch and in class. Students are paired into groups, one to one and small groups are supported by content specialist. This is designed to enable teachers to 3  understanding of the science state exam. address targeted skills. Students are paired into groups, one to one and in small groups are supported by content specialist. As needed small group, whole class, and or one to one. During lunch and in class. During the school day Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students are targeted based on (MOSL) Measure of Student Learning in Social Studies results. AlS, as per the recommendation of content teachers At risk students are determined based on their IEP’s and referrals for counseling. One-to-one instructional tutoring is provided. The school guidance team provides group & individual counseling including: conflict resolution, crisis intervention, class visits & act as a resource for teachers & parents, Case Managers for PPT. Assist with attendance monitoring & intervention services. Child abuse prevention & intervention; address issues relating to students in temporary housing. Referral to outside agencies & services (ex: FAP; family counseling, & academic services). The school psychologist will offer clinical services and provide group & individual counseling including: conflict resolution; crisis intervention, class visits & act as a resource for teachers & parents. 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 67 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will providing after-school programs and Saturday AIS programs for students. Students will also have counseling sessions to help support students. One day of the week is designated for AIS in both ELA and math. We provide materials for school, uniform for those in need and payment for school trips and senior activities. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our recruitment strategies are the following: Attend recruitment fair highlighting our school. Formulating a committee that includes teacher’s administrators for the interviewing process and utilizing a quality rubric to assist in the decision process of hiring a candidate. Experienced teachers are utilized to mentor new teachers as a means of sharing best practices, impact on student learning. Teachers are also given the opportunity to present for professional development and colleagues are allowed to do inter-visitation in their classrooms. Teachers are given assignments based on their license areas and experience. Teachers who aspire to become administrators are given task to support their internship and mentored by one of the administrators in the building. New Teachers are mentored by experienced teacher who can provide guidance, share best practices and impact of student learning. Professional development is provided for teachers throughout the school year in support of best practices to engage and motivate students with the learning process. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All staff members attend weekly professional development, some attend outside professional development that are turned key to staff. The Professional Learning Committee which is made up of teachers discuss the professional development that staff members request and review and link them to the Citywide Expectation and data from multiple sources. All Administrators including the principal attend workshops offered by ELI, Superintendent Professional Developments and Chancellors Professional Developments. All of the above mentioned are ways to further assist teachers and other staff members. Part 3: TA Schools Only 7  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A - We are a Middle School. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are given the opportunity to meet during common panning to create their unit assessment being taught throughout the school year. Furthermore, the Professional Learning Committee which is made up of teachers plan out the professional development that is needed for the teachers in order to provide good practices to promote students learning. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 8  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 469,532 0 13,262 0 7,271,439 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 9  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Jean Nuzzi IS 109, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Jean Nuzzi IS 109 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 1  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Jean Nuzzi Intermediate School 109 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 3  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 4  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 5  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 6  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: -While ELL's are given support during their regular day, there is a need to provide these students with extra help after school hours. Many of these students struggle to keep up with their peers and many times feel a little overwhelmed, shy, and may lack confidence when they are in general classes. These students will be in a smaller group setting where they will be able to drop their affective filter and feel more comfortable to ask for help with certain things they do not understand. The program will help students increase the learning process and culture of living in the United States. Students will have more time to use the Max Scholar Program to further enhance the learning process of English as a new language. Our ELL's population consists of 120 students which equates to 28-6th graders 33-7th Graders and 33 8th Graders plus 26 former ELL's. We anticipate having at least 15 students before school, 40 students after school and 40 during the Saturday program. -Six, seventh, and eighth graders will be served. - ENL Before School Enrichment will take place every morning from 7:00 am to 8:00 am starting October 9th - May 30th to be conducted by Ms. Fils-Julien (ENL) -The program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30-4:30 starting October 1oth- May 30th to be conducted by Ms. Fils-Julien (ENL) and Ms. Haughton (ENL) -Saturday Academy 9:00-12:00, Starting October 25th -May 25th, to be conducted by Ms. Fils-Julien and Ms. Lopez. -Instruction will be in English. -There will be two certified teachers, Ms. Fils-Julien and Ms. Haughton.(ENL license) The teachers conducting program will maintain student records of attendance in an attendance binder and parent notification letters in parents' preferred languages will be kept by the ENL Coordinator. Periodic assessment will be given to assess students progress. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: -There are many strategies that can be used to support the needs of ELL's. These strategies should be shared with all teachers who are responsible for teaching these students in order to provide appropriate instruction. -There will be a workshop for teachers of ELL's. They will be 10 /17/18 & 01/09/19. Each workshop will be one hour long. 9  Part C: Professional Development -Ms. Fils-Julien, Ms. Russo and Ms. Haughton are licensed ENL teachers. Specific topics to be covered will include: Developing language objectives Differentiating Instruction and using scaffolds to support comprehension. Professional Development records will be kept in a binder by the Principal-including attendance and agendas. Teachers providing the Prof. Dev. will be encouraged to attend ongoing workshops provided by our BFSC. These workshops will positively impact the progress of ELL's by helping to close the achievement gap in reading comprehension that exists between ELL's and non ELL's students. - Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: -Parent involvement has a major impact on student achievement. Many times ELL parents are not aware that their child must test out of ENL by passing the NYSESLAT. WE will hold parent workshops to inform the parents of how they can help in getting their children ready for the NYSESLAT. -There will be two information sessions: One will take place in October and one to be done in March. Each workshop will be an hour long. -Ms. Fils-Julien, Ms. Haughton and Ms. Russo -Parents will receive a letter in their preferred language to inform them of the events 10/16/18 and 3/19/19 that will take place for one hour between 4:00pm and 5:00pm and part of the learning is an activity that engages the parent to do something with their child. All information will be translated into the language spoken by parents. Records including attendance, agendas, and notification letters in parents preferred languages will be maintained by the ENL Coordinator, Ms. Russo in the ENL Binder. Parents will be notified via letter and by school messenger. These workshops will be provided to all ENL parents. - 0  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) TItle III LEP $7418.00 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. for per session for ELL's teachers and administrator for After-School and Saturday Program  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $1000.00 General Supplies for class Imagine Learning Software $3948. 00 Title III LEP $13, 262 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Queens District 29 School Name Jean Nuzzi Intermediate School 109 School Number 109 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Karleen Adam-Comrie Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Andrea Russo Teacher/Subject Area Nichole Haughton/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Phara Fils-Julien/ENL Related-Service Provider Sacha Lopez, Elizabeth Reich Superintendent Beverly Mitchell Assistant Principal Lukia Naraine Coach School Counselor Tiffanie Poole, Monica Lowe, Parent Mr. Campion Parent Coordinator Arketa Sherron Field Support Center Staff Member Joshua Metz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 5 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1031 Total number of ELLs 104 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.09% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? - IS 109 employs mid unit and end unit assessments which are embedded in the curriculum Expeditionary Learning, in addition, we use teacher made assessments such as: weekly quizzes, unit exams and vocabulary quizzes. For further on the spot assessment of students' understanding we utilize exit tickets, think/pair/share, graphic organizers, and peer/self assessments. In addition we use areas of focus drawn from ELA Data. Formative assessments are used to inform the instructions of English Language Learners to help us determine what skills/concepts were not grasp/grasp during direct instructions so we could target students in need of extra support during independent activity. For example, during class discussion we make notes of students you were able to contribute to discussion pinpointing hindering factors or facilitating factors that either supported or prevented a particular student in their ability to achieve the learning outcome. 3  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To support this effort the following structures are in place: 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? IS 109 utilizes the NYSESLAT Exam results, DRP (Degree of Reading Power) Baseline Assessments in ELA, to assess the early literacy skills of ELLs students. As well as Diagnostic test from Keystone Learning, a program use for Entering and Emerging Level ELLs. The data collected from these assessments support teachers in making instructional decisions on how to differentiate their support for ELL students as well targeted instructions, for example guided group. Our school focus is reading and writing in all content areas with differentiation to meet students’ needs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? To address interventions using the summative data, we form specific ELLs Subgroups and design instructional programs to enhance students' growth. By this we mean for standalone and integrated instructions we form guided groups with students who showed similar deficiencies/proficiencies in order to bridge the gap as reflected through summative assessment data. The data collected also helps us to set instructional goals for our ELLs 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use the data from the NYSESLAT and ELA to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. The data provides insight into a disparity between listening/ speaking and reading/ writing proficiencies of students. This information helps us analyze instructional best practices or lack there of. The EDAT Tool is used to analyze student achievement data in content areas, identify early warning signs that lead to students' risk of lower academic achievement We use it to focus on the progress towards the achievement of proficiency for specific subgroups of ELLs, and design effective instructional programs and/or interventions for those students. We will continue to use the tool to set instructional goals for our ELLs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Adjustments are made to our ELL program based on data provided to determine which modality students show growth in. After which we re-group and provide targeted lessons to enhance performance in the modality students show a deficiency, usually in reading comprehension and writing. Students are recommended for after school as well as before school ENL help. This way we can focus on modalities students showed deficiency in as a proactive measure. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELL students are grouped together by grade and travel together by class. Students are heterogeneously grouped in their content area classes for integrated services. During integrated ENL, the ENL teacher and the English teacher 4  work together to provide instruction to meet both the content standards and language acquisition. For standalone services we pull out our Entering and Emerging ELLs to a separate location (grade not mixed) using the workshop model (I do, we do, you do) and the guided group model to target areas of focus and meet CR Part 154.2. b. TBE program. If applicable. N|A c. DL program. If applicable. N|A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering students receive a total of 360 minutes of ENL per week which is broken down as follows: 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Emerging students receive a total number of 360 minutes of ENL services which is broken down as follows: 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Transitioning students receive a total number of 180 minutes of ENL which is broken down as follows: 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of either standalone ENL or integrated ENL/ELA. Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENLELA. Our proficient ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA for 2 years after reaching the commanding level. During push in instruction teachers co- teach. Modifications are are made to lessons by the ENL teacher to accommodate the ELLs in the classroom. For standalone services we pull out our entering and Emerging ELLs to a separate location (grade not mixed) using the workshop model (I do, we do, you do) and the guided group model to target areas of focus and meet CR part 154.2. We also follow the ELA pacing calendar to ensure we are reinforcing what they are learning in ELA classroom. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Integrated ENL services are provided by the ENL teacher and the content area ELA teacher. Our ELA teachers follow Expeditionary Learning curriculum which is NYS approved and standards based. Teachers plan together to create lessons that provide scaffolds and supports for ELL students. The content area teachers of English Language Learner students utilize a variety of instructional approaches to support students’ understanding of vocabulary. -Classroom libraries are used to support the ELL students in the content area classrooms. -In the content areas, ELL students receive additional support from the ENL teacher who employs small group instruction in order to differentiate for the English Language Learners. -Native language texts are available in the bilingual libraries of the ENL classroom in order to support students learning in their native language. ELL students are provided with content area glossaries to support their understanding of content vocabulary -Students participate in 90 minute literacy blocks which contain a reading and writing workshop. These reading and writing workshops are comprised of independent reading, a mini lesson, an active engagement, a work period, and a closing. ENL teachers also use the content area curriculum pacing guides to support their instructional unit planning for standalone ENL services. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are given the opportunity to take assessments in their home languages when available, and are provided with such assessments if they choose to utilize them in lieu of the English version (ie. Math State Exam; MOSL Science and SS exams). 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 5  -SIFE students are students with interrupted formal education. Many SIFE students need improvement with basic literacy skills such as the alphabet. When planning lessons, the ENL teacher targets in on the alphabet, simple words, and visuals to support the ELLs to acquire English Language proficiency. -The ENL teacher incorporates the strategies that encourage the SIFE students to acquire listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English. - SIFE students receive the necessary differentiated support via our standalone ENL program and also when they are in integrated ENL. -The instructional plan uses ENL strategies such as exaggerated gestures, repetition, slow speech,TPR, visuals and analyzing reading material to make it easier to comprehend. - The Instructional Plan for Newcomer ELLs in US schools is the following: students receive the necessary help in listening, speaking, reading and writing in English. Assessments such as the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and ENL periodic exams continually allow us to examine student achievement and progress. Additional help is then given according to individual needs and is differentiated for individual students. Entering students, as well as all ELL students are given access to the curriculum in all content areas. Strategies such as note-taking, listening skills and reading comprehension are focused upon. The extra guidance in ELA test prep using effective ENL strategies allows for the ELLs to get the instruction they need to help them succeed. The ENL teacher differentiates her instruction specifically for long term ELLs in order to support gains in language acquisition. They are provided with scaffolding leveled questions, former ELLs receive the mandated 90 minutes of services for up to two years. They are also given extra time on assessments. Finally, all ELLS are encouraged to come to an ENL Afterschool program that takes place on Wednesday and Thursdays. All ELL students are provided with test accommodations during state exams as well as during classroom assessments. Teachers will either modify their assessments or provide ELL students with extra time to complete assessments. Students are also provided with glossaries to utilize during all assessments and are encouraged to use the glossaries. -The after school program runs from October to May and is offered on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30pm-4:30pm . The program instructor, Ms. Fils-Julien, is a certified ENL Teacher who provides instruction in English. The purpose of the program is to help our students work individually and/or in small groups to enhance comprehension, grammar, vocabulary, listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. The twelve step reading strategies are taught to promote different levels of thinking (Blooms Taxonomy) through ENL textbooks and various leveled libraries which give our students choices to express their literacy style. From the simple to the complex, students gain the confidence to share their ideas and opinions in English. The goal is to help ELLs achieve English Language proficiency in all modalities. Once the ELLs achieve proficiency, they test out of the ELL program and then receive transitional services for two years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ELLs teachers create individual programs for each student that is part of their case load. -This individual schedule allows the ELLs teacher to provide differentiated support to each student, dependent upon his or her specific needs. During integrated ENL/ELA students are exploring the Expeditionary Learning curriculum which is specific to each grade level and is state approved/standards based. The ENL teacher and English teacher modify those lessons to provide differentiated support for ELL students. -Visuals, manipulative, modeling, scaffolding, vocabulary building and technology are incorporated into daily lessons; For example Maxscholar reading/vocabulary program and Imagine Learning . All content area classrooms are equipped with SMARTBoards, IPads, Chromebooks and computers to support instruction. -The Special Education Assistant Principal Ms. Williams reviews students IEP mandates and ensures that students are placed in the correct program to meet IEP mandates and ENL services. -The instructional strategies used are as follows: Students create their own dictionaries with vocabulary tied to the topic to support their academic language acquisition, translated versions of the texts are used when available, we also use graphic organizers to make the material more comprehensive for the students, students are provided with word to word dictionaries to translate unknown words, in addition a copy of individual word walls with vocabulary and pictures specific to the text being studied are given to students.(after the words are being introduced). During integrated and standalone instruction during reading activities an audio track of the section of the text being read is played simultaneously as students read silently. This 6  way, as they read the words, they can decipher unknown words . During standalone instruction we employ the choral reading strategy, which is phased out as students' fluency increases. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? -ELLs identified as having special needs require help in Acquiring the English language. As with other ELLs, the assessment results of their exams, the NYSESLAT helps to determine where special needs ELLs require the most support. - IEP goals additionally give insight into the needs of a Special Ed ELL. Between the information from the exams and the annual review/triennial testing for a special needs ELL, these students receive support for their learning disability and language acquisition. Lessons are modified accordingly. -Teachers utilize the following, but are not limited to, strategies in order to accelerate the language development of ELL-SWDs: activate prior knowledge, model, scaffold, TPR, vocabulary development, and utilizing the Twelve Strategies of Reading comprehension. -The ENL teachers work in collaboration with the Special Education teachers, and the Special Education Supervisor, Ms. Williams, in order to best support and service our students with special needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. -Intervention available to our general population are also available to our ELL students. The program offers academic tutoring in the content areas along with extra-curricular activities for students. -In addition to the Beacon Program, students will be offered after school content support in ELA and Math. -Our ELLs students are provided with after school academic intervention by our ENL teacher, Ms. Fils-Julien. Our content area teachers provide targeted support to individual students during their lunch periods. -The teachers focus on the four modalities, reading and writing and listening and speaking. -As per student data given by ELA, Math, and other core content area teachers, ENL teachers provide targeted instruction to bridge the gap in said content areas. For example: A group of 6th grade ELLs has difficulty explaining steps taken to solve a math problem. the ENL teacher then teaches a writing lesson on how to explain the steps take to solve the problem in a short response . The writing response includes sequencing of steps to help students transfer skills learned in ELA to other content areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Starting with the school year 2017-2018, ENL teachers will provide before school support services from 7:00am to 8:00am. During that time, areas of focus/trends found in data will be addressed. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? IS 109 provided bilingual services approximately 10 years ago; however, the program was terminated due to lack of enrollment. Parents were provided with weekly reminders in their home language about the availability of the bilingual program. In addition, follow up for phone calls were made by ENL teachers; However, they were no positive responses from parents. No enthusiasms were showing for the implementation of said program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Intervention available to our general population are also available to our ELL students. Parents and students are made aware of intervention services via letters backpacked home and also by Schoolmessenger, which provides translated messages to parents when necessary. ENL students are able to apply to the Beacon afterschool program that takes place daily from 2:20 until 6:30 pm. The program offers academic tutoring in the content areas along with extra-curricular activities for students. -Our ELL's students are provided with after school academic intervention by our ENL teachers, Ms. Fils-Julien and Ms. Haughton. In after school we will focus on content area support that is tailored to the needs of each student attending the sessions. During Saturday ELL Academy the focus will be on the four modalities, reading and writing and listening and speaking in preparation for the NYSESLAT Exam. The before school ELL support program will address trends taking from data for improvements in students' performance. 7  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELL's students are supported by a variety of instructional materials, including Visions for beginners, intermediate and advanced students, Voices in Literature, Keys to Learning, classroom libraries that include text in English and native languages, bilingual dictionaries, and content glossaries. -We also have Social Studies books written in Haitian Creole and Spanish. -Each ENL classroom has two computers for student use and teacher instructional support, Chromebooks. ENL students receive differentiated instruction in content area classes that is supported by SMARTboards, document readers, and computer technology. -Maxscholar, Achieve 3000, and LightSail are also used to supplement academic support. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language dictionaries are provided -We also have a variety of books written in different languages in order to determine if a student is literate in their native language -Students are allowed to use Google translate for word to word translation . Each ENL classroom contains a native language library that students are given access to daily in order to support their native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. -All resources are considered age appropriate and are modified to meet the needs for each age and grade level. When planning their lessons, teachers utilize the appropriate grade standards in their content area to guide their levels of instruction. Teachers also access the IEPs of students with disabilities to ensure that they are providing such students with the mandated support and interventions expressed in the IEP. Teachers differentiate their support to students based on their proficiency levels ie, EN, EM, TR,EX or CM. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). For the students identified as ELLs enrolled prior to the beginning of the school year, we host an orientation meeting for parents and children. The parent coordinator provides workshops for parents of all students throughout the school year. Newly admitted ELLs are paired with other students by their guidance counselors, Ms. Lowe, Ms. Fadli, and Ms. Gentles at the time of enrollment so that students feel more comfortable navigating the school day during their first few days of school. -Oftentimes, however, newly admitted ELL children do not enroll until September when school begins. Rarely do we have ELL children list noticed from programs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The school offers Spanish as a language elective for all students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 8 N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All ELL personnel receive professional development throughout the school year on a rolling basis. The ENL coordinator and ENL teacher attend workshops provided by the Borough Field Support Center for our district. The teachers then come back to the school and turnkey those best practices learned at the PD sessions to the entire staff during Monday afternoon PD sessions. Teachers of ELL's receive professional development supported by the ENL coordinator and ENL teacher during Monday afternoon Professional Development sessions. In addition, teacher leaders provide professional development to the entire staff on Monday afternoons. Teachers of ELLs also receive notification about professional development sessions offered by the Borough Field Support Center via email and are encouraged to seek PD that suits their needs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. -Staff development is ongoing throughout the year. -Teachers of ELLs receive notification about professional development sessions offered by the Borough Field Support Center, DELLS, via email that set goals and guide curriculum. -Teachers will participate in Q-TEL workshops and the Math protocol workshops. -The ELL Coordinator provides professional development as well as modeling of best practices. -The administrative team, guidance counselors, teachers, paraprofessionals, Speech therapists and SETSS teachers participate in content area professional development throughout the school year facilitated by department heads. -The ELL Coordinator, works with individual teachers that teach the classes with a high concentration of ELL students to hone their craft by making accommodations to help ELL students. - In addition, the ENL teachers work with teachers by forming cluster groups, observations and debriefing sessions to help these teachers differentiate to make the content accessible to ELLs. -Teachers attend workshops that focus on how to provide support for ELL's while implementing the CCSS. -Teachers are also given the opportunity to participate in PDs offered by the DOE provided through DELLS. They are then encouraged to turn-key information in department meetings and/or grade level meetings, whichever is more appropriate. Certificates of attendance and or copies of meetings attended by staff are placed in the appropriate personnel file. The school administration keeps a record of all workshops provided at the school level along with agendas and attendance documents. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Teachers invite parents of ELLs to meet with them about their child's progress on Tuesday afternoons, which are dedicated to parent engagement. If a parent is not available on Tuesday, ENL teachers schedule individual appointments with those parents. Translation will be provided through the translation Hotline when needed, so that parents receive communications in their preferred language. During the annual individual meetings wiyh ELLs parents, the goal is to provide one to one in depth 9  discussions, outlining expectation, proficiency levels and the importance of parent involvement to the success of English Language Learners. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. To increase parent and community participation, the parent coordinator, Ms. Sherron will schedule ELL parent workshops. The parent coordinator also present during parent orientations. In addition, parents of ELLs attend trip plans to provide both students and parents with prior knowledge necessary for parents to provide help at home to improve language acquisition. At IS109, we also provide parents of ELLS opportunities to attend information sessions where teachers and guest speakers address ways in which parents can access services offered to ELLs in the school and in the community. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Karleen Adam-comrie, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Jean Nuzzi Intermediate School School DBN: 29Q109 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Karleen Adam-Comrie Principal Lukia Naraine Assistant Principal Arketa Sherron Parent Coordinator Andrea RussoPhara Fils-JulienN ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Tiffanie Poole School Counselor Beverly Mitchell Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 06/07/17 06/07/17 06/07/17 06/07/17 06/07/17 06/07/17 06/07/17 06/07/17 06/07/17 06/07/17 06/07/17 06/07/17 06/07/17 06/07/17 06/07/17 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 29Q109 School Name: Jean Nuzzi IS 109 Superintendent: Beverly Mitchel The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Phara Fils-Julien ENL Teacher yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The languages spoken by the parents are determined primarily in two ways. The way that all of the parents’ languages are recorded each year is through emergency cards (blue cards). On this card parents document the languages with which they are most comfortable; both written and spoken. These cards are printed in English, Spanish, Bengali, Haitian Creole, Urdu, French Arabic and Punjabi, the language of the card that the parent receives is determined by asking the student which languages the parent would prefer. The second way that we collect the data of the parents’ languages is by completing the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). Upon registration into the school, each family is administered the HLIS. This information is used to identify potential ELL students as well as to document the languages that are spoken in our students’ homes. Because the home language of a great majority of the homes that do not speak English is Spanish and Haitian Creole, great efforts are taken to be sure to translate all documents into Spanish and Haitian Creole. 2. Any documents that need to be translated to another language is done using in house bilingual staff. If bilingual staff is not available then the document is submitted to translation services through the Department of Education 3  website. If the document is more than one page then there are three Department of Education approved translation companies that translate the documents for the school at a fee. A percentage of the school budget is allocated for this purpose. 3. Bilingual teachers, the Parent Coordinator and other building support staff provide translation for parents when needed (e.g. during parent-teacher conferences). While this is primarily Spanish and Haitian-Creole translation, teachers provide other translations. When it is necessary to communicate with a parent in a language other than the ones spoken by staff at the school, the school utilizes the translation unit that can be accessed by telephone. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Cebuano Chinese Any French Gujarati Haitian Creole Hindi Mandarin Malayalam 11 60 1 5 4 1 27 4 0 2 English 1059 Pilipino (Tagalog) Punjabi (Panjabi) Portuguese Sinhalese Slovak Spanish Temne 3 19 2 1 1 122 1 .82 4.46 0.07 .37 .3 .07 2.01 .3 0 .15 78.79 .22 1.41 .15 .07 .07 9.08 .07 11 62 1 4 3 1 41 4 1 3 .82 4.61 0.07 .3 .22 .07 3.5 .3 .07 .22 1036 77.08 3 19 2 1 1 128 1 .22 1.41 .15 .07 .07 9.52 .07 4  Urdu Ukrainian 20 1 1.49 .07 21 1 1.56 .07 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. none Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Entitlement/non-entitlement letter September Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The school routinely provides all written material in English and in Spanish, which are the two overwhelming majority language groups in our school. In addition, in order to communicate specifically with our Haitian Creole, Bengali, Punjabi, speaking families, we utilize the language skills of one of our bilingual staff members as necessary in written communication with these parents. Because we have a high need for translation services, most written language assistance is 5  After School/Saturday Success Program September/Through out the year as requested by parents Parent Engagement Activities Through out the year September-June provided by in house volunteers, such as bilingual teachers. Written translations are made by the multilingual school staff at per session rate. The DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit is also contacted to translate school documents being sent home to parents who speak other languages. We provide enrollment packages in the covered languages for parents, including lunch forms, Chancellors Regulations, etc. We also used the interpretation hotline to assist with translation when calling parents or have a non-English speaking parents called in. The school routinely provides all written material in English and in Spanish, which are the two overwhelming majority language groups in our school. In addition, in order to communicate specifically with our Haitian Creole, Bengali, Punjabi, speaking families, we utilize the language skills of one of our bilingual staff members as necessary in written communication with these parents. Because we have a high need for translation services, most written language assistance is provided by in house volunteers, such as bilingual teachers. Written translations are made by the multilingual school staff at per session rate. The DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit is also contacted to translate school documents being sent home to parents who speak other languages. We provide enrollment packages in the covered languages for parents, including lunch forms, Chancellors Regulations, etc. We also used the interpretation hotline to assist with translation when calling parents or have a non-English speaking parents called in. The school routinely provides all written material in English and in Spanish, which are the two overwhelming majority language 6  n/a groups in our school. In addition, in order to communicate specifically with our Haitian Creole, Bengali, Punjabi, speaking families, we utilize the language skills of one of our bilingual staff members as necessary in written communication with these parents. Because we have a high need for translation services, most written language assistance is provided by in house volunteers, such as bilingual teachers. Written translations are made by the multilingual school staff at per session rate. The DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit is also contacted to translate school documents being sent home to parents who speak other languages. We provide enrollment packages in the covered languages for parents, including lunch forms, Chancellors Regulations, etc. We also used the interpretation hotline to assist with translation when calling parents or have a non-English speaking parents called in. n/a n/a 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent/Teacher Conferences September, November, March, May Initial ELLs Parent Orientation September New Student Orientation Through out the year between September and June provide interpretation service(s)? In house bilingual staff will be used for translation when staff is not available, calls will be made to the translation hotline to assist with translation In house bilingual staff will be used for translation when staff is not available, calls will be made to the translation hotline to assist with translation In house bilingual staff will be used for translation when staff is not available, calls will be made to the 7  n/a n/a n/a translation hotline to assist with translation 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use the phone messenger to communicate with the parents in case of a school emergency in their language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members are given a copy of the chancellors regulation A-663 at the beginning of the school year and given the translation phone number to use when needed to communicate with non-English speaking parents. The LAC will conduct a PD for the entire staff to go over the different tools available to them when in regards to translation and interpretation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Written translations are made by the multilingual school staff at per session rate. The DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit is also contacted to translate school documents being sent home to parents who speak other languages. We provide enrollment packages in the covered languages for parents, including lunch forms, Chancellors Regulations, etc. When we need a translator for any meetings, if we do not have a staff members that speaks the language we use the over-the-phone interpreter. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Surveys will be given out by the Parent Coordinator during her regular scheduled meetings. The data is used to help improve language services provided to parents. 8 
