2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 30Q111 School Name: P.S. 111 JACOB BLACKWELL Principal: DIONNE JAGGON 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 111Q 343000010111 Pre-K - 8 School Number (DBN): 30Q111 37-15 13 th Street, Long Island City, NY 11101 718-786-2073 718-729-7102 Phone Number: Dionne A. Jaggon Fax: Email Address: Djaggon2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Center for SupportiveSchools Dionne A. Jaggon HellaAbebe Mrs. Tricia Piskopus MillisiaTaylor Dionne A. Jaggon SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): AminahLee N/A District Information Geographical District: 30 Dr. Philip Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North Room 518 Queens, New York 11101 Superintendent’s Office Address: pcompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-391-6122 Phone Number: 718-391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 3  Queens Plaza FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Mr. Larry Pendergast Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North Long Island City, NY 11101 lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. School Receivership In April 2015, state lawmakers and Governor Andrew Cuomo created section 211-f of the State Education Law, which established the School Receivership program as a new intervention strategy to turn around struggling schools. This new law, and Commissioner’s regulation 100.19, requires that “Persistently Struggling Schools,” defined as Priority Schools that have been in the most severe accountability status since the 2006-07 school year, be given an initial one or two-year period under a “Superintendent Receiver”. These schools were placed in receivership under the New York City Schools Chancellor. Each school must make demonstrable improvement on specific benchmarks or it will be placed under an independent receiver. Under the Chancellor’s Receivership Plan, the School Renewal Program is NYCDOE’s 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 5  core strategy for turning around struggling schools. Renewal Schools have already begun implementing significant interventions and are receiving additional resources and support to accelerate student performance and help close achievement gaps reflected in this RSCEP. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 6  The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 7  School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 8  Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Dionne A. Jaggon Tricia Piskopus MillisiaTaylor Melissa Toro AminahLee Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 10  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jamal White MichleanaIngrassia Stephanie Reece Maria DeViccaro Maria Iozio Parent Member/ Parent Staff Staff Parent Staff Staff Staff Parent Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Community Engagement Team (CET) Signature Page Directions: Please fill out this form and indicate members of your Community Engagement Team. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each Community Engagement Team member in the first column. 2. Record the position and constituent group represented in the second column. 3. Community Engagement Team members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If a Community Engagement Team member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original signature page. Name Position and Constituent Group Dionne A. Jaggon HellaAbebe Tricia Piskopus Represented Principal CBOCommunity SchoolDirector Teacher Signature (Blue Ink) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 11 Signature (Blue Ink) RegineJoachim AminahLee TreciaParsons N/A Mitchell Taylor NA NA Name Position and Constituent Group Represented oParent Coordinator Parent Secretary Community School Associate Community Bishop NA NA Erica Urena-Thus Superintendent Representative NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 12  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. P.S. 111Q, The Community School of Multimedia, Communication and Arts, is located between the Ravenswood and Queensbridge public housing developments and is a Pre-Kindergarten through 8th grade school serving 340 students. The school population comprises of 48.09% Black, 42.23% Hispanic, 2.93% White, 3.52% Asian and 1.76% other students. The student body includes 10.89% English Language Learners and 26.69% special education students (excluding PreK). Boys account for 47.94% of the students enrolled and girls account for 52.06%. The P.S. 111Q Mission Statement: Our mission at Community School 111Q, The Community School of Multimedia, Communication and Arts, is to facilitate an atmosphere that creates a home away from home, because we know the influential home and school connection empowers our scholars to grow from good to great! All scholars are expected to attend high school and college. We will ensure that all scholars visit college campuses before they graduate to foster college awareness and a desire for higher education. We have taken on this challenge and hold ourselves accountable for the progress made by our scholars. We share in the expertise of the school leaders, teachers, parents, community and the scholars themselves to be partners in this endeavor. The P.S. 111Q Vision Statement: We are a diverse, collaborative school community dedicated to raising the standards of academic achievement for all of our students. Through rigorous standards driven instruction, differentiated learning, and high expectations, it is our purpose to create a community of socially conscious, computer literate, life-long learners, who are prepared to attend college to participate in and contribute to a global society. Our teachers, teacher assistants, counselors and staff members are committed to making our school safe and supportive for everyone. Since 2014, we have significantly reduced the number of incidents and we have developed a more collaborative and supportive environment for students and staff. 100% of Pre-K -5 teachers indicated on the NYC Survey that the the students are safe in hallways, bathrooms, cafeteria and their classrooms. We believe it is very important that our entire school community work together to make this happen. Every staff member is committed to ensuring that our scholars come to a safe school each day. We are equally committed to providing our scholars with the supports they need to grow academically and socially. We work with our parents, scholars and staff, and our school support team, as well as with borough offices to identify and address new needs and put in place proven strategies for school improvement. We continue to look at our school to decide what we need to do to improve school safety and support systems. We increased focus on academic portfolios in Literacy, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. Success Mentors and Peer Group Connection are utilized to increase attendance and all teachers and staff are trained on Therapeutic Crisis Intervention System (TCIS) during the 2018-2019 school year. The special population that our school has identified that requires additional support is our English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Students that are classified as English Language Learners and students with disabilities continue to struggle with making progress on New York State ELA and Math exams. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 13  The elements of the Framework for Great Schools that our school has made the most progress on over the past year are the following: School leaders communicate high expectations to staff through the Danielson Framework for Teaching and professional learning sessions. Family engagement sessions help parents understand their children’s academic and socio-emotional growth and communicate expectations connected to college and career readiness. We have established a system of accountability for school expectations and supports towards future academic aspirations. School leaders and faculty have procedures in place to align curricula to the Common Core Learning Standards and integrate the instructional shifts. Teachers engage in structured inquiry-based collaborations to support curricula alignment across grades and examine student work and assessment data. We are increasing parental involvement through instructional parent workshops facilitated by the parent coordinator, teachers, CBO partners, Community School Director, administration, and the Director for School Renewal. We made progress in family engagement over the past year through our Parents as Partners grant. More parents are making contributions to the school activities as evidenced in attendance at the school functions. We have increased attendance at our PTA Meetings, our new Parent Cooking Class, The Lincoln Center Family Night. Additionally, through the establishment of our Family Room our parents have a safe space to meet and collaborate on various ways to support our school and the students. Our newly elected P.T.A. are on site on a daily basis. Their presence also ensures additional parents are contributing to their children’s education and volunteer on the Community School Trip Day, the Monthly Award Ceremony and other academic and social school events. We have partnerships aligned to every grade. Our Lead CBO, the Center for Supportive Schools (CSS), supports all stakeholders (in Grades PreK-8) including, all scholars, staff, family and interested community members/partners. The Community School Director (CSD) manages collective-impact strategies to meet the needs of the C.S. 111Q community and ensure the success of all students. LEAP partners with Pre-K. Kindergarten and 1st Grade have a nutrition based partnership with City Harvest. 1st-2nd graders take advantage of Reading Rescue, a one-on one reading intervention program. Through the LEAP Arts Grant 2nd-4th grade ELL and SWD students are able to combine classroom learning with arts, theater, and music. 2nd and 5th grade students benefit from Alvin Ailey Dance Kids. Studio in a School offers practical art and cooking skills to 3rd-5th graders. The Museum of Moving Images offers animation programs for 5th graders. K, 3rd and 4th Grade benefit from Community Word Project. Grades 3-5 participate in the Leadership Program and grades 6-8 participate in partnerships with the theater program at Lincoln Center. 7th and 8th graders participate in Thurgood Marshal Junior Mock Trial. Jacob A. Riis Settlement House COMPASS/SONYC programs provide afterschool and summer camp programming for K-8th students. All grades benefit from our partnership with Smile Dentist (Bi-annual visits) and Warby Parker Vision Screenings. Moreover, our support and health services with Counseling in Schools, the nurse, the doctor, and the Asthma Case Management Program Specialist are available to all referred students in the student body. Renewal Hour: Rigorous Experiences: The Renewal Hour targets all students for academic intervention with planned differentiated activities in ELA and math with the goal for measurable progress in ELA and mathematics. The activities include guided reading, guided math, genre writing, mathematics problem solving and reading. We integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences such as use of manipulatives and technology. In honoring the Framework for Great Schools, several examples of effective school leadership are observable throughout our school. Our school leaders are committed to students’ success at all levels and transitions. The 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 14  Principal and Community Schools Director act strategically to secure partnerships aligned with the RS-CEP goals for the school community. Our inclusive, motivating, and rigorous curriculum exemplifies the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards. High expectations are observable in every classroom and students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. We bring resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families and community-based organizations. As a group of highly collaborative and professional educators, we are continuously striving to expand our instructional capabilities and innovate in our classrooms to provide additional opportunities at our school. The recognition of our partner organizations who continue to place their confidence in our school has been an amazing experience for C.S. 111Q. As a Renewal School, we will expand implementation of the following school improvement strategies during this school year: Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during after school and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners Jacob A. Riis and the Center for Supportive Schools. Increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in school. Ongoing customized professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. We will also undergo a comprehensive needs assessment across all six elements of the Capacity Framework (rigorous instruction, collaborative teachers, supportive environment, effective school leadership, strong family-community ties, and trust. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q111 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 316 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 64 64 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 18 2 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 95.3% % Reduced Lunch 14.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.3% 41.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.08 6% 22% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 12.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 75% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 12 12 89.6% 0.0% 30.4% 49.7% 4.1% 1.3% 2 6% 6.9 7.9% 26% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 16  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review, offering Positive Learning Environments is our Area of Celebration. Our pedagogical inquiry approaches promote shared leadership and focus on improved student learning. Our focus is to develop pedagogical practices with researched based strategies that help students learn best. These evidenced based techniques are informed by instructional shifts and the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Our teachers’ activities and lesson plans are engaging and aligned to standards-based curricula, to meet the needs of all learners and ensure students produce meaningful work products. Priority Needs: According to the New York State testing data our school's overall testing data indicated a 1% decrease in mathematics and a 4% decrease in ELA. The data revealed that additional focus is needed on further developing academic and personal behaviors of persistence and perseverance in responding to text based questions in the skills of Point of View and Inference. Due to this analysis, the following has been concluded: Our priority is to have a coherent system to increase overall results of student performance using the four steps listed below. 1. Data analysis of June Instructional Reports and our i-Ready BOY, MOY and EOY data. 2. 3. Professional learning with an emphasis on inferring, point of view, number sense, and problem solving to Identification of the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that need support in each grade and subject. build capacity of our teachers. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 18  4. Observations, monitoring and adjustment of lessons to meet the students at their zone of proximal learning As a school, we need to improve the students’ ability to make inferences and determine point of view in ELA and related content areas. Students need to demonstrate proficiency in foundational reading skills in order to find key details and cite text evidence that will support making inferences and identifying point of view. Students need to be taught to make sense and meaning of the text. We will work on supporting teachers to monitor and build student comprehension skills and to plan for misconceptions of text, multiple entry points, scaffolded supports for ELLs and SWDs. Students need to build their vocabulary skills to ensure comprehension of text. To do that, the Instructional leadership team members along with the the FSC coaches, Universal Literacy Coach K-2, School Based Literacy Coach 3-8, TC consultants, Goldmansaur consultants and Lead Teachers will work to support teachers in teaching reading skills/strategies such as, Close Reading, Guided Reading and Shared Reading. Independent reading time will be increased to support students in building stamina and increase literacy skills overall. Research tells us that the more students read the better readers they become. The Instructional Leadership will support teachers through professional learning to teach and model for teachers the plan, pedagogical practices during lesson delivery to ensure student success. In mathematics, students demonstrated a need in acquiring a stronger foundation in number sense, making meaning of numbers and understanding the relationship of numbers in problem solving. As stated above in regards to strengthening student comprehension, we found that students also struggle with the comprehension of math word problems. Students need to engage in math related accountable talk to gain a level of comfort in expressing their thoughts and transferring that thinking onto paper to explain their process. Students need to build their knowledge of math related vocabulary and use math related academic language to express themselves both orally and in writing. Students need to make meaning of word problems, solve problems using various strategies, as well practice expressing their understanding of the problem in written form and make their thinking visible. Students need to make decisions after reading math word problems on the mathematical operations they are being asked to solve and to determine the mathematical strategies for computation. The use of math manipulatives, scaffolds and strategies such as CUBES will be incorporated into every lesson to support students in their learning. To support teachers in planning and the delivery of math instruction, the Instructional leadership team along with the FSC coaches, Math Solutions Consultants and School based coach will create professional learning opportunities as well as real time coaching to support teachers in strengthening number sense and in building conceptual understandings. Our school focus is on providing our students with high expectations for greater opportunities for measurable progress for all students. Through in-house and outsourced professional development, we will continuously develop the expertise of our instructional staff with a lens on instructional materials and supports for our ELL and Special Education students. The process of the work of school leaders to ensure supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students will occur in 6 week cycles using a Curriculum Overview of the standards that need to be taught. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? The 2018-2019 school's instructional focus is: Point of View and Inference through Differentiation/Multiple Entry Points: Danielson Domain 1E Designing Coherent Instruction Plans represent the coordination of in-depth content knowledge, understanding of different students’ needs and available resources (including technology). This will result in a series of learning activities that are differentiated, as appropriate, for individual learners. Instructional groups are varied as appropriate, with some opportunity for student choice. Scholars will be provided resources to complete the tiered activities that will allow scholars to completely access 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 19  the curriculum. We will support diverse learners through the implementation of Advanced Literacy; student discussions, reading rigorous texts, writing across genres and explicit teaching of academic and content specific vocabulary using the instructional focus of inference and point of view. Assessment and Advancing Questions: Danielson Domain 3b Questioning and Discussion Techniques Teacher use a variety or series of questions or prompts to challenge students cognitively, advance high level thinking with a focus on point of view and inference. Through this practice, students learn to engage in meaningful discourse and promote meta-cognition. Teachers provide students with scaffolds, such as sentence starters, prompts, and vocabulary banks to formulate many questions, initiate topics and make unsolicited contributions. Math: Based on the 2017-2018 math data; we have implemented learning goals for our students. Teachers will identify various solution pathways and anticipated challenges to plan questions and use NYS Released questions that check and deepen scholars’ understanding by having the scholars solve math problems, show their work and explain their process ins words. The students will engage in math discourse on viable arguments for problem solving to have a deeper understanding of the math through exposure to relevant word problems and math tasks. Students will build their capacity in demonstrating their knowledge of math concepts in multiplication, division, fractions, ratios and scientific notation through the use of manipulatives, teacher created math tool kits and word problems with connections to real world scenarios that they already have a level of familiarity with. Literacy: Based on the 2017-2018 ELA, we have implemented learning goals for our students. Teachers will model and teach the students to identify possible interpretations of the text, make inferences about characters, and understand the author's point of view, purpose, and perspective. Through the support of professional learning, teachers will plan carefully sequenced text-dependent questions that both check and deepen scholars’ understanding of analyzing connections between themes and characters, make logical inferences, identify and analyze themes, point of view of illustrations, authors or characters and evaluating arguments made in text. Scholars will develop stamina, persistence and patience while grappling with new and complex questions, tasks and concepts. The school incorporates the Data Wise Inquiry process to continuously make instructional decisions using the June Instructional Reports, student work, formative assessments and the i-Ready summative assessments to identify next steps in lesson execution. Classes operate and function through cooperative learning. The teachers use multiple entry points to ensure the success of each child by teaching strategies, questioning, and routines across classrooms that are strategically differentiated so that all learners, including students with disabilities and ELL’s, have multiple entry points, support, and extensions into the curriculum. We promote the instructional focus through each professional learning session, the Data Wise inquiry process, bi-weekly learning walks, analysis of student work, teacher observations, professional learning and feedback. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? Our vision for the implementation of the CCLS aligned curricula is one that meets the needs of our diverse learners personally, academically and culturally. To do this, we envision and expect that teachers and school leaders work collaboratively to plan and prepare multiple entry point materials for each lesson in Spanish and English, to empower both our dominant language populations. Moreover, we will incorporate high interest and culturally representative books and literature that positively represent Latina/os, Asian, Hindu and Black legacies. Supportive yet disciplined structures improve the teachers’ abilities to plan lessons by creating several need-based experience assessments, 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 20  technological resources and academic materials that are prepared in advance of lesson delivery. The materials are culturally relevant and responsive, while engaging all learners. Each lesson targets our ELL’s, SWDs, and at risk students with varied resources and learning goals. Students have opportunities to transition with the differentiated and flexible groups after formative and summative assessment has been gathered. The differentiated activities direct the students’ use of text, the use of iPads to view video information and take notes, complete charts through acquired information in prepared articles, use calculators, manipulatives, problem solving strategies, and unravel math problems, etc. for each task. The teachers' facilitate each lesson using data from formative assessment checklists aligned to the learning objective and standard. Teachers' also use this data to provide immediate feedback to the students. The feedback supports their work in subsequent tiered activities with a focus on point of view and inference in ELA, math, science and social studies. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? All students will be exposed to college and career readiness skills. Through rigorous instruction in their daily classes, critical thinking questioning and discussion, student led discussions, activities that allow for student choice, exposure to real world careers, research projects, and interdisciplinary curricula. Instructional shifts are embedded within daily lesson plans, units and curricula. This will be evident in teachers' plans through questioning, activities, and assessments. We will include all Literacy Instructional Shifts with a focus on Literacy Instructional Shift 4 to deepen discussions on point of view and inference citing text based evidence through a common text. Math Instructional Shift 5 will be a focus on application. Students will be taught to choose the appropriate concept for application even when they are not prompted to do so; the inference. Teachers provide opportunities at all grade levels for students to apply math concepts in “real world” situations. Teachers in content areas outside of math, particularly science, ensure that students are using math – at all grade levels – to make meaning of and access content. The school imposes strict criteria for what it means to exit a grade level by using the school-wide grading policy and paying keen attention to the instructional shifts in ELA and Mathematics. With the emphasis being placed on college and career readiness, all lessons are correlated to an instructional skill and strategy as evidenced in the measurable learning objectives. The utilization of researched based curricula Ready Gen, Go-Math, Teachers College Reading and Writing, Social Studies Passport, and the NYC Science Scope and Sequence, lessons have engaged the students in rigorous and engaging CCLS aligned learning activities. We created an assessment calendar, unit plans, administer unit assessments and have weekly and monthly data meetings to analyze the data and inform our instruction. On the administrative level, we utilize a protocol for looking at student work and the same is embedded and reflected in the process across all grade teams. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? Teachers' lessons are structured to provide students with rigorous instruction to prepare them for college and careers. The delivery method for instruction is the workshop model. The scholars are geared for success by the teachers' creating of the CCLS culminating portfolio tasks that the students complete through multiple entry points and differentiated activities. The portfolio initiative creates a universal understanding of rigor, planning and cognitive engagement. The expectations for teaching include activities students working together or individually on solving math problems, completing hands-on science experiments, participating in thoughtful discussions, writing essays or completing long term projects. In the classrooms, students move through tiered activities of learning to meet the measurable learning objectives. Each lesson addresses the instructional shifts of reading complex text, writing for information, narratives and problem solving. Student have opportunities for self-assessment that are reinforced with the teachers’ formative assessment. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 21  How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? The teachers use data through the Data Wise Inquiry Process to plan lessons with differentiated tasks. Teachers use Data Wise analysis to design multiple entry points for each lesson and ensure the success of every child. By using various series of questions or prompts, students are challenged cognitively and advance high level thinking and discourse. Teachers also ensure that also students voices are heard in discussions and students formulate many questions to contribute to classroom discussions. All disciplines will incorporate reading and writing literacy standards. Through the use of data teachers will be able to determine what their students learning styles are and what their levels and needs are. Through the use of technology, computers, research projects, online programs and activities students will be able to have a vast array of learning experiences with in the classroom that address their different learning styles. Through whole group, small group and one on one instruction, our various partners and our lead CBO will ensure we will be able to provide multiple entry points in and out of the classroom. Teaching strategies will address the needs of our growing ELL population, questioning, scaffolds to address students' needs. Projects will allow for student choice to build on multiple entry points, including scaffolds for struggling students and extensions for higher functioning students. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? The process of student self-assessment and teacher formative assessment address our ongoing focus to align assessments to curricula, use ongoing assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. The assessments garner immediate teacher feedback of commendations and next steps based on rubrics and the CCLS that are at each station, conference notes collected by the teacher as questions are asked of the students, an assessment checklist that identifies the skills and strategies that each students mastered or those that require additional support. During the summative Data Inquiry monthly meetings, the teachers and school leaders analyze the completed portfolio tasks in all core subject areas in grades K-8. The data is used to add interventions in future lessons and develop enrichment projects for students that have demonstrated the need for additional rigor. The data incorporates pre and post assessments in ELA, math, science and social studies that are scheduled on the assessment calendar and shared across the grades. Teachers will use or create assessments, rubrics that are aligned with the school's curricula and high expectations. Teachers will also provide actionable feedback to students. Teacher's assessment practices consistently reflect the use of ongoing checks for understanding and students self-assessment so that teachers make effective adjustments to meet all student's learning needs. Teachers will use and increase assessments, rubric, and have discipline based grade policy. Administrators and teacher leaders will provide teachers with ongoing support and actionable feedback to build a culture of learning, and data driven instruction. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) Reading Rescue Diagnostic DRA2 Formative/Summative K-2 K-8 Reading Rescue Tutoring Differentiated Reading Instructional Groups 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 22  Ready - Paper and Pencil Benchmark i-Ready Diagnostic/Summative 3-8 K-8 Part 3 – Annual Goal A stimulation of the NYS Exams Differentiated Reading/Math Instructional Groups and Progress Monitoring Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019 there will be an increase of student achievement in ELA and Math as measured by the New York State ELA and Math Exams. New York State English Language Arts Exams: Increasing from 12% proficiency in 2017-18 to 20% proficiency in 2018-19 Increasing 8 percentage points. Math New York State Exam: Increasing from 8% proficiency in 2017-18 to 18% Proficiency in 2018 -19 - Increasing 10 percentage points Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Receivership Benchmarks expected to improve Performance Index New York State Math Exam Performance Index New York ELA Exam 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 23  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Grades K-8 teachers and students Teachers will work collaboratively to develop grade level math tasks and activities that are reflective of the focus, coherence and rigor required by college and career ready standards. Unit plans and lesson plans will reflect the alignment of progressions of the math standards. Performance Index New York State Math Exam Instructional Leadership Team Instructional Leadership Team Unit Exams i-Ready Diagnostics Field Support Center Math Instructional Lead Teachers Teachers Teacher Assistants Field Support Center Math Instructional Lead Teachers Teachers Teacher Assistants How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Evaluative Observations Google Drive Tracking System to Progress Monitor Classroom Observations Tracking of ELA standards based assignments using Jupiter Weekly Progress Monitoring of standard based student work products. Teachers progress monitor student work by daily formative assessments utilized in the classroom; assessment 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 24  Grade K-8 teacher and students Provide students the opportunity to engage and practice reading and writing daily in standard based fiction and non-fiction complex text. Performance Index New York State Math Exam September 2018-June 2019 Unit Exams i-Ready Diagnostics Student will ground their responses to questions developed by teacher teams based on information in the complex text. Questions will be designed to assess comprehension, lead active discussions and generate rigorous responses that cite text evidence. Instructional Leadership Team Field Support Center Math Instructional Lead Teachers Teachers Teacher Assistants checklist and conference structure aligned to the standard and skill/strategy. Evaluative Observations Google Drive Tracking System to Progress Monitor Classroom Observations Tracking of math standards using Jupiter Weekly Progress Monitoring of standard based student work products. Teachers progress monitor student work by daily formative assessments utilized in the classroom; assessment checklist and conference structure aligned to the standard and skill/strategy. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 25  In collaboration with our CBO (Center for Supportive Schools), administration, teachers, and parents/families will work together to ensure all students are supported - in and out of school - to master rigorous instruction. Parents/families will be invited to participate in Scholar Led Conferences and other parent workshops, updating them of the academic progress scholars are making throughout the school year using the meeting opportunities and JupiterEd to monitor classroom grades. Parents and families will be engaged to support students’ positive academic and behavioral habits. Families will be given chances to celebrate their students’ progress. Ms. Joachim the Parent Coordinator, Ms. Toro, Family Worker/Attendance Specialist, and the Community School Director, will develop engagement strategies, support the Parent Association, and will monitor attendance and community engagement. All engagement will be tracked and monitored in JupiterEd to determine how collaborations impact students’ academic achievement. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. We offer professional development time on Mondays for lesson planning. We utilize per-session and per diem for human resources, including for planning after school professional learning opportunities through customized learning clinics. The topics for the customized professional learning will be identified through evaluative and non-evaluative observation feedback. We incorporate curriculum resources, consumables and instructional supplies. For example, books, iPads, laptops, Mathletics computer based licenses for each student, Jupiter Grades Data warehousing yearly license, math consultant, Teachers College Writing Consultant, library bins, bookcases, mentor texts, publishing paper, glue sticks, folders, laminator, laminating sheets, chart paper, easels, markers and calculators. We use funding for incentive trips and family activities. We have appropriate staffing to meet the requirements of the action plan. We invest in translation services, the School Website to Broaden Access to Public and various marketing materials to increase communication. We proportion funding for field trips and supplies for enhanced learning opportunities. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019 there will be a 5% increase on student achievement in ELA as measured by Ready Diagnostic assessments. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Ready Diagnostic assessments Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Reflection of School’s HEDI Rating According to the teacher surveys, most staff and students feel safe and there are fewer level 4 and level 5 safety and behavior related incidents. Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS) continue to offer consistent supports for vulnerable/traumatized students, Students With Disabilities, and high-needs classrooms. The School Quality Guide indicates 92% of teacher from Pre-K - 5 say that students are safe outside and around the school. 100% of Pre-K - 5 teachers say that students are safe in hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and the cafeteria of our school. In order to continue the enhancement of our social and emotional support, our methodology towards school culture and discipline are governed by a restorative theory of change that results in a safe and collaborative environment. In conjunction with our PBIS social and emotional curriculum, we created and utilize a PBIS Mediation Agreement. By use of the agreement, we discuss with our students alternate ways in which a disagreement may be resolved through the interchange of ideas for conflict resolution. Parents are our partners in the mediation process. They receive both notification of the mediation and our appreciation of their support in of said mediation process. Through the Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools, students and teachers learn how create a safe and nurturing environment to proactively prevent crisis from occurring , deescalate students to a baseline level, and participate in a life space interview. We also partner with Counseling in Schools. Additional supports that staff receive are targeted interventions from Counseling in Schools to observe classroom interactions, providing feedback that is clear and supported with next steps to ensure a customized training for strategies of behavior management from a licensed social worker. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 27  School’s Strength Our strength is in the members of our Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS) Team. The team analyzes the OORS Incident Data on a weekly basis, provides customized and whole group class management workshops to teachers and communicates their findings to the entire school population. We have an Ethical Character Building Program using a "Book of the Month" that is correlated to an ethical character trait. This is demonstrated through the use of a read aloud to demonstrate examples of the ethical character trait. We consistently use and display our school slogan, “Students in Shining A.R.M.O.R. (Articulate, Responsible, Motivated, Outstanding and Respectful)” to convey positive behavior. Teacher created A.R.M.O.R lesson plans to represent the behaviors associated with the A.R.M.O.R. acronym. The Scholar Dollars are high interest incentives for students and teachers. Teacher Spotlight highlights teacher’s contributions academically and socially. The write up appears with a picture of the teacher and the recognition. Classroom DOJO is a platform used to communicate all behaviors to the students and their parents. Teacher collaboration and support of the PBIS initiative and the PBIS Team. Through the support of Assemblywoman Cathy Nolan, we also renovated our school cafeteria for the scholars. The kitchen was renovated with new systems. Morning Motivation allows students to build self esteem and confidence to start their instructional day with an empowering outlook. Priority Needs Our priority needs are to improve social and emotional growth by reinforcing positive behavior, environment, attendance, and discipline with the goal to have the students self-regulate. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? P.S. 111Q is a nurturing academic environment that creates an atmosphere that fosters learning. CBO Partnerships: Creation of a Community School Team (CST) which includes the principal, assistant principal, SLT members, Center for Supportive Schools (Executive Director, Director of Collective Impact Partnerships, CSD), CBO partners, and community leaders. Our CBO will continue to partner with the Jacob Riis Settlement after school program, Counseling in Schools mental health provider and Smile our provider for dental services. There are additional art program partnerships such as Lincoln Center, Moving Image, and Leadership Program. The social-emotional framework our school has selected is PBIS, one of the foremost advances in school-wide discipline, which places emphasis on school-wide systems of support that include proactive strategies for defining, teaching, and supporting appropriate student behaviors to create positive school environments. Our Framework functions on a continuum of positive behavior support for all students within our school which is implemented in areas including the classroom and non-classroom settings. For example, hallways, school buses, cafeteria, auditorium and restrooms. The students are explicitly taught how to behave in each setting using the A.R.M.O.R. lessons. The students are consistently rewarded with positive comments and Student Dollars. The Student scholar Dollars are an incentive for the students to improve positive behavior throughout the school community.. The desired outcomes are positive behavior and measurable progress. Another social-emotional framework our school has selected is TCIS. Through TCIS, teachers learn how to create a safe environment where students are able to communicate their needs in a positive and effective way. Teachers are trained 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 28  in de-escalating potential crises from occurring and are able to handle stressful situations with a more positive approach. The ultimate goal of the TCIS is to have the student self-regulate and return to instruction. Promoting Improved Social and Emotional Skills & Counseling: We collaborate with our CBO, Center for Supportive Schools, and other partners, such as Counseling in Schools (CIS), to improve attendance and promote social and emotional skills by providing youth development throughout all grades. Our programs focused on the arts include Alvin Ailey in the Arts, Learning through an Expanded Arts Program (LEAP) and Community Word Project (CWP). Additional programs like The Leadership Program and Gear Up help develop leadership and literacy skills to provide the students with greater opportunities to use vocabulary in their discussions toward conflict resolution and school readiness. In an effort to improve and motivate scholars academically, with daily attendance and behavior, the School Leadership Team will facilitate at least one school based event each month. Scholars will be required to wear uniforms consistently to earn scholar dollars for admittance into each event. Parents will receive advanced notification of the requirements for admittance into each event. This year, the expansion into PGC: Peer Group Connection, trains our 8th graders to serve as peer leaders to our 6th graders through a researched based curriculum which teaches students self-efficacy, garnering conversations, and finding solutions to problems. Measuring Social Emotional Development: We collaborate with our CBO to gear our students toward grit and perseverance, student achievement, growth mindset, academic self-efficacy and emotional competence. The objective is to have a progressive increase of parent participation in school activities, as measured by attendance metrics, by pre and post surveys and by focus groups. The CBO sustains and supports social and emotional growth by working with the guidance counselors to have ongoing programming, create student clubs and have culminating activities to be shared with the parents and community on self-esteem and character building. Music and art classes provide students with the opportunity to be successful and express themselves through the arts. Attendance is monitored and outreach practices implemented to ensure progressive increases in attendance. The attendance initiatives consists of home visits, daily morning wake-up calls, Success Mentors that build relationships with the students. and attendance celebrations. Using Data to Respond to Student Social and Emotional Needs: The principal meets with the Community School Director on a weekly basis, instructional cabinet, Renewal Team and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Center for Supportive Schools has created evaluation tools that gather data on socio-emotional development and use the New York State After School Network Program Quality Assessment tool identify students in need. The School Leadership Team will create a Dress Down opportunities to build community excitement as we celebrate Red Ribbon Week, Respect For All Week, Spirit Week and monthly themed events. The School Leadership Team will work with Director for School Renewal to inform all constituents of the progress of air conditioning in the auditorium and the gymnasium. Completion of projects expected by the end of Summer of 2018. Attendance: Attendance is monitored daily and outreach practices are implemented to ensure progressive increases in attendance. The attendance initiatives consists of daily morning wake up calls, Success Mentors, home visits, daily/monthly incentives; PBIS Scholar Dollars and attendance celebrations. The school meets weekly for attendance meeting to address the chronic absenteeism. Administration participates with calling home to check-in on families who demonstrate chronic absenteeism. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 29  CBO Partner Center for Supportive Schools (Lead CBO) CBO Focus We partner with schools in three areas: developing all students into leaders; empowering teachers to collaborate with each other and with students; and engaging entire school communities to improve how learning happens. Our Community School strategy is grounded in a focus on student leadership as an underutilized and highly effective lever to eradicate disengagement and make significant school improvements. We engage all members of the school community in the relationships and meaningful dialogue necessary to improve substantially and sustainably all students’ school experiences and outcomes. CSS uses a collaborative, data-informed and relationship-driven process to partner with schools. Learning through an Expanded Arts Program After-school program providing sessions in Theatre Arts, using visual arts, music, theater, dance and film to teach math, ELA, science, and social studies. Programs are aligned with the Common Core Standards and STEM initiatives. Counseling in Schools Counseling In Schools (CIS) promotes the emotional and social growth of children so that they can thrive in school and succeed in life. CIS also helps teachers to engage children in need and supports administrators to lead struggling schools. CIS professionals help children who struggle with homelessness, bullying, violence, disruption in class, mental trauma and truancy. By effectively counseling these children, CIS opens them to education, while also creating a calmer learning environment that benefits all children in the school. CIS is also there in times of crisis with response services designed to help address immediate and secondary trauma. Asthma Case Management Program Sponsored by The New York State (NYS) Healthy Neighborhoods Program (HNP) to reduce the burden of asthma related illnesses through individual meetings with students and families. Working closely together with nurse and other in-house health providers. City Harvest Catch Nutrition education program for K-1st grade students City Harvest Cooking Matters City Harvest Cooking Matters for Adults Nutrition education program for 3rd grade students Nutrition education program for parents Community Word Project (CWP) Collaborative arts residency that inspires children to read, interpret, and respond to their world and to become active citizens through writing and theater. Counseling in Schools (CIS) Mental health support for the general student body through one on one interventions, group therapy, and family therapy. In addition, staff supports are provided. Jacob A. Riis Settlement House COMPASS/SONYC Afterschool program for the general student body (K-8), including homework help, Adventure Learning, extra-curriculars, and holiday trips. The Leadership Program During-school and afterschool enrichment sessions for individual students and groups that focus on leadership and violence prevention. The Lincoln Center Art making, questioning, reflection, and contextual research through experiential lessons that are co-planned and co – taught by the classroom teacher and the teaching artist. Each unit is made up of 6 lessons. Smile St. John's Gear Up Provides free bi-yearly dental screening/cleaning. Tutoring and high school prep program for 8th graders. High school fair trips and college visits included. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 30  Success Mentoring AmeriCorps attendance mentoring program to improve individual and overall student attendance. Celebrate teacher to staff relationships and community success. College Access College Awareness initiative that allows middle-school students to take advantage of the rich learning opportunities available at higher learning institutions. Our scholars will be visiting several colleges and universities during the year. Warby Parker Vision Screening Free yearly eye screening. Students will receive glasses as needed. How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? Improvement of Attendance and Chronic Absenteeism: The goal for attendance is 91.4% as measured by the Department of Education attendance data. We actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting. For example, the station (multiple entry point) tiered activities, sports teams, physical activity to begin the day, regular recess, etc. We will transition our new CBO, Center for Supportive Schools, to conduct five Cradle to Career convening meetings in the community. P.S. 111Q and CSS will create forums for parents/guardians and community members to not only have a voice but also to be active leaders who improve the schools and distribute and develop community resources. Moreover, CSS will offer an evidence-based intervention that supports school transitions by leveraging older students as leaders and mentors for new and incoming students (Peer Group Connection). The P.S. 111Q convening meetings are held monthly. Attendance is monitored and outreach practices perfected to ensure progressive increases in attendance by the District Attendance Teacher, Family Worker and Attendance Team. We offer physical education, music and art during first period classes to entice students to attend school and to be punctual. There is a system for daily rewards using Scholar Dollars, weekly updates to parents on their child's current attendance rate and monthly incentives for the students. Targeted incentives are also implemented for students in the 80-90% range to promote a love of learning and to recognize the importance of consistent attendance. The School Leadership Team increased the number of in-class parent/volunteer activities and programming that encourage respect for all scholars. The SLT will continue to support Violence Prevention Workshops and the Respect for All Week Programming through the Guidance Office. The assistant principal and principal, will facilitate monthly workshops centered on helping parents attain academic resources of their child's learning during the Parent Breakfasts and PTA meetings. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 31  expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019 there will be a 10% reduction of Level 3 incidents as measured by the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? Supportive Environment School Survey Safety N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 32 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) PBIS Team 91.4 Attendance Students September 2018 School Leaders Teachers How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Weekly Attendance Reports PBIS Team, Teachers, Staff, Students and Parents PBIS Team, Teachers, Staff, Students and Parents 91.4 Attendance September 2018-June 2019 School Leaders and PBIS Team Weekly Attendance Reports School Survey Safety September 2018-June 2019 School Leaders, Guidance Counselor, and PBIS Team Weekly Attendance Reports Teachers Teacher Assistants Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. PBIS Team attends the district wide training for Stage 4 of the PBIS initiative. Survey the students and utilize the information to inform program quality. Teachers and staff incorporate Stage 4 of the PBIS Research Based Program for Professional Development for all stakeholders in our school. CBO data is used to identify gaps to support socio-emotional health. This information issued to outreach to parents and the community. PBIS Team conducts meetings, workshops and administers surveys to build and sustain school-wide PBIS practices by teaching specific and appropriate de-escalating techniques for our students with special needs. For example, acknowledging the students' feelings, using proximity, deciding on fair and equitable consequences for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 33  behavior. The team provides parental support in the form of connecting parents to outreach programs, parent classes using identified areas in the surveys to improve student attendance and punctuality. Parents participate in Learning Leaders. The PBIS Team also engage in Physical Fitness Tuesdays with our parents and scholars using Achieve Physical Fitness Equipment Package. School visibility of all programs that are offered using the school website, newsletter, phone messenger, conferences, for our parents and students. Incorporate parent volunteers through the Learning Leaders training program. We upgraded the appearance of the main office, library, classrooms and family room to create a warm and welcoming environment. Teachers and Teacher Assistants and the School Based Support Team will participate in the RULER training. RULER is an evidence-based approach for integrating social and emotional learning into our schools. RULER will support staff to teach students to recognize, understand, label, express, and regulate emotion. 91.4 Attendance September 2018-June 2019 School Leaders and PBIS Team Weekly Attendance Reports PBIS Team, Teachers, Staff, Students and Parents School Survey-Safety October Administrative Team 2018-June 2019 PBIS Team Teachers, Teacher Assistants and the School Based Support Team The Online Occurrence Report System (OORS) will be used to monitor the Level 3 incidents in comparisons to previous years. The data will be used to continuously reinforce the RULER 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 34  techniques to support the scholars to identify their moods and triggers so that they are capable to self-regulate. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In collaboration with our CBO, Center for Supportive Schools, administration, and teacher, parents/families will be invited to participate in weekly parent meetings facilitated by classroom teachers. Families of C.S. 111 will be invited to participate in school community events centered on empowering our young scholars:  Attendance ceremonies  ARMOR awards  Academic achievement awards in ELA, math, science and social studies.   Development and Feedback Forums, Focus Groups, Surveys, and Community School groups Scholar Led Conferences Families will also be informed of success stories provided by PBIS Case Managers to reinforce and celebrate positive behavior. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We utilize per-session and per diem for human resources. We incorporate curriculum resources, consumables and instructional supplies. For example, books, Gopher physical education supplies, mascot costume, monthly field trips, iPads, laptops, markers and calculators. Allocations will also be made to the UFT Positive Learning Collaborative for the TCIS training. Resources also be allocated for the RULER resources, mood meters, Learning Leaders parent training, school website, office furniture, library furniture and classroom furniture. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 35  By January 2019 there will be a 5% reduction of Level 3 incidents as measured by OORS. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Online Occurrence Reporting (OORS) Management System Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards X (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths: The school faculty consistently engages in parent outreach regarding student academics and community resources. Teachers work collaboratively during common planning to revise and refine curriculum. Teacher teams use the backwards design model to collaboratively plan units. Needs: Additional work is needed to increase parental participation that is aligned to student progress and data analysis to better understand school documents (ex: IEPs). Our priority is to ensure that the parents and families are aware of their child’s progress and have knowledge of curriculum to support their children at home. Moreover, we still need to strengthen the inquiry and improvement processes to develop more rigorous curricula for Students with Disabilities and English and Language Learners. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 37  Reflections: The school leader has regular communication with students and parents through morning routines, weekly email blasts to the parents. The Parent Coordinator send outs daily phone messages. Wake up calls continue in September 2018 for our students to ensure their timely arrival at school. Other mechanisms for communication include attractive signs in the building, monthly Parent Newsletters, monthly calendars, letters to parents and students. Parents will have opportunities to share ideas through the bi-monthly Parent Breakfast and the ongoing cycles of workshops afforded to the parents. School data is shared with the parents via mail and presentations. Opportunities are needed for our parents to understand the data and ask questions that can support their children. This structure brings our parents closer to the academic end of school and to understand the instructional implications of the data. Every teacher is scheduled to meet with their grade team at least twice a week for common planning. Teachers also meet weekly for professional learning sessions. The three groups for differentiation are Enrichment, Strategic, and Intensive. The lesson plans are based on the needs of the students and the units are created based on the common core learning standards and the school wide learning goals. Teachers also include in lesson plans how they will meet the needs for SWDs and ELLs. Teachers collaborate weekly to create and update unit plans. The teachers have implemented i-Ready and MyON to regulate student achievement and assign enrichment activities. Teachers have been trained to teach the behavior associated with the character traits of A.R.M.O.R. (Articultate, Responsible, Motivated, Outstanding, and Respectful), PBIS, and are trained in the Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS). Teachers review student work collaboratively in teacher teams, looking at trends from Monitoring, online assessments, pre-and post-assessment, and portfolios. Educational Consultants and Data wise support staff facilitate professional learning and be available for additional support throughout the school year. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? School Organization for Teacher Collaboration At P.S. 111Q, our motto is Teamwork Makes the Dream Work! All pedagogues engage in data inquiry based professional collaborations that result in school-wide instructional coherence and increased student achievement. Pedagogue collaboration has also fostered collegial relationships, pedagogue involvement in decision-making, and accountability. Teachers participate in a variety of professional development classes both on and off-site. These classes continuously improve their craft. Collaborative activities are inclusive of: o Common Planning periods are embedded in the teachers’ schedules. o Professional learning sessions that engage teacher teams in data inquiry in all core subjects. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 38  o Teacher teams generate dependent questions to reinforce students’ ability of referring to the evidence to support their responses and to promote critical thinking skills. o Bi-Weekly teacher leader meetings – administrator meets with a group of grade leaders to render support and discuss their grades’ initiatives and concerns. Teachers have multiple opportunities to engage students in different parts of the lesson to support individualized instruction adapted to our student needs. Interaction among students with their peers and classroom teachers allows staff and students alike to assess whether our students have acquired the content and skills necessary to be successful and move on to the next task. Deliberate attention to scaffolding for all students includes deliberate attention by teachers during the design of unit planners and then an organized reflection of the same based on student work products from said planners. Teachers review student work products in teams to ensure that they plan for individual needs. Multiple entry points are supported in the same fashion. Instructional shifts are evident in the expectations and requirements of participation. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? We envision collaboration amongst our school's Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning by collaboratively creating systems for data review for student needs in in Teacher Teams by using the Data Wise inquiry model. Students experience an adjusted math and literacy curriculum that focuses on a few topics and allows them to spend more time on major math and literacy topics based on the 6-Week plans after data analysis of periodic assessments. Data/RTI Meetings are held bi-weekly by members of our School Based Support Team (SBST) that consists of our social worker, guidance counselors, academic and culture coordinator and IEP Director. These professional collaborations provide teacher teams and administrators with the opportunity to discuss student data and plan specific academic or social and emotional adjustments to meet students’ needs. The analysis of data generated from DRA2, ELA and Math baselines, unit assessments and benchmarks provides teacher teams with information about student comprehension and their own practice. Teacher teams develop assessing and advancing question to promote authentic discussions with a focus of point of view and inference. Teachers review the formative assessments daily to make instructional decisions and improve their practice. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teaching and Learning: Unit Plans & Lesson Plans-Teacher Collaboration Teacher teams work together to plan lessons aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers create lessons based on themes in writing and reading. Teacher Teams work together to share CCLS expectations within the grade through the analysis of student work, changes in their practices that led to increased student achievement. Teachers should and will review student work collaboratively in teams, and give feedback on assessments, and discuss needs and progress of students. A cycle of Professional Development will be dedicated to inter-visitation, reviewing student work as a team, and protocols for looking at students work and giving feedback will be part of the cycle. The school instructional cabinet will observe teacher practices to determine strengths and weaknesses. Next we will use this data to identify key professional development necessities to build teacher practices and student learning. Teachers will also receive regular actionable feedback on their teaching practices. New teachers will have their mentors to 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 39  support in the building of their teacher practices. The cabinet will have meeting to review data, identify areas of growth and need, and determine next steps to further improve teacher practice. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teachers work in vertical teams to share CCLS expectations between the grades to add rigor and support with instructional tasks that address the instructional shifts in literacy and mathematics. Teachers within each team will ensure that they work together across disciplines and grades to maintain alignment in curricula for students to build their understanding from one subject to the next and from one grade to the next.This will allow best practices to be spread amongst all teachers with in the same discipline/grade to analyze student work collaboratively and create/identify differentiated resources within each lesson. Teacher teams standardize grading policies through the process to normalize expectations using the 2-point, 3-point and 4-point rubrics utilized to grade the New York State exams. Other rubrics are also introduced for content specific work and varied genres such as brochures, pamphlets, research papers and journals, etc. Together, they ensure that best practices are continuously shared amongst teachers with the goal to enhance the students' ability to transfer knowledge on assessments. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent June Instructional Reports Identify standards that demonstrate the need for support. Identify teachers that demonstrate the capacity for measurable improvement. New York State ELA and Math Exams Identify students that can be targeted to push to level 3. Identify level 3 students that could slip to level 2, align professional development, create a foundation to track identified students throughout the year. IReady Data in Math and ELA Progress Monitoring to change lesson execution and improve teach moves in the classroom to meet the needs all learners including, SWD's and ELL's. On Demand and Post Demand Writing Pieces Make instructional decisions on differentiated scaffolds and to measure progress. Data Wise Inquiry Assess student work-Focus on ELL's SWD's-Improve teacher practice Assess student strengths on the CCLS Math Standards and make lesson adjustments End of Unit Math Exams Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, there will be a 20% increase in positive responses to questions corresponding to collaborative teachers as measured by the New York City School Survey. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 40  Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Performance Index New York State Math Exam Performance index New York state ELA Exam Framework for Great Schools-Collaborative Teachers 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 41  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Teacher Assistants Teachers Teacher Assistants All teachers are scheduled a minimum of at least one common planning period a week to meet with their grade team, analyze student work, and create lessons that address the needs of all students. Teacher Leaders and educational consultants facilitate professional learning sessions for all teachers that address the ELA and the Math Problems of Practice Framework for Great Schools: Collaborative Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Leadership Team Teacher Leaders, Teachers and Teacher Assistants Framework for Great Schools: Collaborative Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Leadership Team Teacher Leaders, Teachers and Teacher Assistants Teachers Teacher Assistants Framework for Great Schools: Collaborative Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Leadership Team Teacher Leaders, Teachers and Teacher Assistants Data Wise facilitate professional learning sessions to all teachers on the data inquiry protocol. Team leaders to ensure that their grade meetings follow the Data Wise protocol that includes Organize for Collaborative Work, Build Assessment Literacy, Create Data Overview, Dig into Student Data, Examine Instruction, Develop Action Plan, Plan to How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Instructional Coach and Data Specialist support the Common Planning meetings Instructional Coach, School Leaders, Teacher Leaders and Data Specialist support the Common Planning meetings Instructional Coach and Data Specialist support the Common Planning meetings 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 42  Assess Progress, and Act and Assess Teachers participate in Learning Walks and observe Best Practices in differentiation, multiple-entry points, questioning, and lesson execution from other teachers to be implemented in their own classrooms. Students Teachers and Teacher Assistants 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Framework for Great Schools: Collaborative Teachers September 2018-June 2019 School Leaders, Teacher Leaders, Teachers and Teacher Assistants Instructional Coach and Data Specialist support the Common Planning meetings How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families of C.S. 111 will be invited to participate in Scholar Led Conferences and be invited to participate in weekly parent engagement conferences offered by the classroom teacher. Families of C.S. 111 will be invited to participate in school community events centered on empowering our young scholars:  Attendance ceremonies  ARMOR awards  Academic achievement awards   Development and Feedback Forums, Focus Groups, Surveys, and Community School groups Scholar Led Conferences Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We utilize per-session and per diem for human resources for substitute teachers to permit staff members to attend district led professional learning cycles. We incorporate curriculum resources, consumables and instructional supplies. For example, F-Status supervisor, books, Great Leaps, Fundations, Wilson, iPads, laptops, markers and calculators. Budget resources are allocated to secure music and art teachers' common planning with social studies teachers. Data Wise training, funding for additional professional learning sessions, per-session funding, projector bulbs, document readers, technology repairs, folders, paper, clipboards, printer ink, copy machine ink, flash drives, headphones, laptops, laptop chargers, ipad chargers, markers, chart paper, pens, professional portfolios for teachers, additional funding for staff preparation period coverages Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 43  Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, there will be a 10% increase in positive responses to questions corresponding to collaborative teachers as measured by UFT Survey. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. UFT Survey Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 44  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 X 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strength: Our ability to reference the Danielson Framework to enhance teacher practice and use it as the foundation to commend teachers and provide next steps is our school’s major strength. The use of the common language afforded by the Framework builds instructional coherence throughout the school. Data Sources: Advance Observation Reports demonstrate growth over time through the use of Teachboost. The most recent Quality Review Report indicated that we strengthened the Instructional Core. Needs: High level student thinking and explanation of their thinking is point of view and inference to be evident in all lessons. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 45  Students have the opportunity for reflection at the end of each lesson to transfer their knowledge through discussions, math explanations and citing text evidence. Our priority is to develop student centered instruction where all students are intellectually active and engaged in learning new information. Reflections: Through weekly Instructional Leadership Team meetings the principal and a team of teachers created SMART goals for Pre-K-8. The goals are quantitative and align with the Chancellor's Framework for Great Schools. The priorities that are outlined in the goals are student achievement that support our school in meeting the Renewal benchmarks. The school leader strategically programmed the school so that all grades Pre-K-8 have no less than two (2) opportunities to meet weekly for Common Planning. The principal and assistant principal leverages the provision to have monthly Faculty Conferences during the lunch periods to incorporate an additional professional learning cycle that provide additional opportunities to analyze data and enhance professional craft. The principal and assistant principal complete the observation and feedback cycles. Frequent grade walk through of identified grade and grade bands are conducted to provide teachers with non-evaluative feedback. Feedback sessions are conducted with the use of the Danielson's critical attributes in each Domain. Teachers are given the opportunity to reflect on their lessons and determine the critical attributes that were evident in the lessons. Attributes that were not evident are provided as next steps. Teachers are provided with feedback and clear next steps that can be incorporated within three (3) days. The Renewal Team also participates on weekly walk throughs. Teachers who are visited from team members, are provided with effective feedback and notable mentions of effective practices reflected in their classrooms. The school relies on the structures of the SLT Meetings, Data Inquiry, Weekly Professional Learning, Observation and feedback to assess curriculum, track scholar achievement and enhance parental involvement. The structures provide opportunities to share ideas and for parents and teachers to make take leadership roles in the school. When feedback is given and next steps are identified; the principal and assistant principal with their teams have the capacity to make revisions and modifications that support parents, teachers and students with the goal of measurable progress. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? Articulate Shared Vision In order to clearly communicate the shared vision of high expectations to all members of the school community, school leaders ensure that differentiated professional learning is provided to meet the needs of the staff, as well as provide supportive feedback. P .S. 111Q provides students with opportunities to engage in rigorous learning activities to expand their thinking. Students are expected to learn at high levels through curricula that incorporates all core areas. Lessons integrate real world experiences to which the students can make connections to how those experiences are relevant to their lives. P.S. 111Q believes that people learn by constantly engaging in discussions with each other, reading and writing. Lessons integrate Academic Language to ensure reading, writing, listening, speaking, and thinking critical attributes. As a result, our students engage in discussions with their peers and staff as they study academic and social theories and writing in all of the Core Subjects. We also believe that all students have different learning styles and knowledge base; therefore, our goal is to increase our knowledge of our students in order to enrich their understanding and growth. Lessons will be 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 46  geared towards three different groups: Enrichment, Strategic, and Intensive. Our students have also demonstrated the need to be nurtured and rewarded for their on task behaviors, taught expected behaviors in areas of our school and how to support their peers and teachers through positive communication. Ensure Strong CBO Partnership The principal and assistant principal ensure a strong CBO partnership by including the Director in all decision-making processes. They create a structure whereby the students demonstrate positive behavior during the day and the Renewal Hour. Consequently, they have collaboratively identified and developed our instructional foci: “Questioning and Multiple Entry Points” and “Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports” The goals are in line with the Framework For Great Schools to give our students, teachers and the leadership team opportunities to make measurable progress. At P.S. 111Q we recognize that all students, teachers, teacher leaders and school leaders are learners and that learning is an ongoing process. The CBO incorporate all of the rituals and routines of the PBIS initiative. The school and individuals continue to improve by setting academic and social goals. The intended outcome of these goals is to create a safe and nurturing learning environment where all students make measurable progress as evidenced in the monthly portfolio pieces, Measure of Student Learning Exams (MOSL), formative assessments and the New York State Exams. Our teachers make measurable progress in instructional best practices using the Danielson Framework for Teaching as evidenced in their formal and informal observations. The school leaders make measurable progress as evidenced in the Learning Environment Survey, Quality Review data, New York State Exams and the teachers’ added instructional value. The school supports a shared accountability through the work of the Teacher Leader Community Team. Their responsibility is to maintain our partnerships with local business and city officials, enter our students in all contests offered by our elected officials and organizations, apply for grants and organize community events at our school and in the Astoria, Queensbridge and Ravenswood housing developments. The Teacher Leader Instructional Team are responsible for facilitating instructional workshops for the grade bands of K-2, 3-5 and 6-8. These teachers attend the Teacher’s College Writing and Reading workshops, turnkey the information to our teachers and continue to support all teachers until the expectations are observable and consistent. The structure that is in place to support this work is weekly meetings and professional learning with the principal and teacher leaders. Delegation to the Assistant Principal and Community School Director Distributive leadership has been a practice that has been embraced. The assistant principal and Community School Director play a pivotal role in supervising all our initiatives and building capacity with our instructional staff, parents and students. Distributive leadership practices include: o The assistant principal and Community School Director facilitate professional learning sessions. o The assistant principal and Community School Director chair various committees. For example, PBIS Team, Community Team, Teacher Leader-Renewal Team, Attendance Team, PPT, and the RTI Coordinator. o The assistant principal and Community School Director serve as the Cohort Leader for the School Based Support Team and a grade band of teachers. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 47  On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? The aspect of my leadership that I plan to focus on is distributive leadership and shared accountability. To ensure shared accountability, our school community examine outcomes of varied assessments to monitor success in attaining this goal. Student success is monitored by examining: Mid-Year and End of Year assessments Informal and formal observations of students Teacher observations of students Teacher generated interim assessments New York State Assessments Formative and Summative Assessments Portfolios Monitoring student work to ensure that all work is standard based The teacher teams are responsible for meeting and planning through the Data Inquiry process. Teacher leaders share accountability in the instructional planning measures to attain progress. The structure that support this work is the role of Data Specialist to collect the data from all teachers according to the intervals set forth in the collaboratively created Assessment Calendar. The Assessment Calendar has intervals for the MOSL exams, the portfolio assessments, DRA2, Unit Tests in science, social studies and Math. This school year the On Demand Writing pieces for the Teachers College Units of Study have been added to the assessment calendar. Student outcomes are monitored through: Observation cycles by school leaders and teacher leaders Learning Walks by Renewal Team Response to Intervention Meetings Review of agendas and minutes from Data Inquiry meetings Perusal of teacher lesson plans for Common Core aligned lessons Post observation conferences regarding modification in instruction Data binders, formative assessment checklists and conference notes Review of students’ notebooks and published pieces 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 48  What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? Teachers, Teacher Assistants, Teacher Leaders, and School Leaders collaboratively define and provide visual examples for each criteria in the Danielson Framework for 3b and 3c. During meetings we will revisit the vision, mission and instructional focus to ensure that our work is clearly aligned to the instructional focus of inference and point of view in all subject areas. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? The teacher leaders support actualizing our vision for differentiated leadership. Through their leadership with the learning walks that are comprised of teachers and teacher leaders and non-evaluative observations and feedback sessions. The teachers develop trust through their improved practice as measured by the evaluative Danielson observations. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? The School Leader team (SLT) in collaboration with the CBO and our partners are the core groups for school governance to ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Monthly-Evaluative 1-2 Days Weekly-Non-Evaluative Teacher Leaders and School Leaders norm their practices by identifyinglow inferenceand targetedmoves on the part of the students and teachers that are aligned to the Danielson Frameworkcriteriain 3b and 3c. What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Teachers will regularly review data from the student 2 point responses in ELA and Math; 3 point math responses and 4 point ELA written responses. Teachers will regularly review i-Ready data in order to develop flexible groups in the classrooms. Teacher Leaders School Leaders Instructional Leadership Team New York State Release Questions Data Sorter Instructional Leadership Team School Leaders How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 49  The teachers work on a staggered schedule to have all licensed teachers providing instruction during the renewal hour. All teachers will have a dedicated period to provide targeted for interventions for grades K-2 period 3 and Period 8 for grades 3-8. All instructional staff members and students work together in differentiated groups to provide intervention in literacy and mathematics based on the June Instructional Reports, i-Ready data, and end of unit assessments. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the Instructional Leadership Team will support teachers through professional learning to enable teachers’ lesson plans to represent point of view, inference and the application of concept development in math problem solving as measured by a 10% increase in teachers’ effective ratings in “Designing Coherent Instruction" component 1e in Danielson to advance measurable results in scholars work. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Framework for Great Schools: Effective School Leadership New York State ELA Performance Index New York State Math Performance Index 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 50 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Evaluation Form of Initial Planning Session and a process to incorporate next steps during the Observation and Feedback process. Framework for Great Schools: Effective School Leadership September 2018-June 2019 Teacher Leaders Instructional Leadership Team Professional Learning Evaluation Forms Teachers School Leaders Pluses/Deltas on Meeting Wise Rolling Agendas Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Framework for Great Schools: Effective School Leadership September 2018-October 2019 School Leaders School Leadership Team, school leaders, teacher leaders, teachers, teacher assistants, parents, students and the community School Leadership Team, school leaders, teacher leaders, teachers, teacher assistants, parents, students and the community Meet with teachers at initial planning conferences to set professional goals for the year. Create goals for the students based on the baseline assessments on the DRA2, Teachers College On Demand writing and the June Instructional Reports. Teacher Leaders and school leaders provide professional learning opportunities as well as opportunities for scheduled inter-visitation visits/feedback sessions with a focus on 3b and 3c as a means to build instructional capacity school wide; assessed through Teacher Leader non-evaluative observations. Analyze evaluative teacher observations data with a focus on the student work and progress made by the middle third of scholars 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 51  that our focus on the Data Inquiry, ELL’s and SWD’s. Collaborate with coaches and teacher leaders to create schedules that include opportunities for presenting professional learning on lessons that have multiple entry points and differentiation and questioning and discussion techniques. Analyze Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) data in 3b and 3c data to disaggregate classroom observations to provide information to teachers to continuously strengthen their practice during the feedback sessions. School Leadership Team, school leaders, teacher leaders, teachers, teacher assistants, parents, students and the community School Leadership Team, school leaders, teacher leaders, teachers, teacher assistants, parents, students and the community 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Framework for Great Schools: Effective School Leadership September 2018-June 2019 School Leaders Instructional Leadership Team Teachers Teacher Leaders Framework for Great Schools: Effective School Leadership September 2018-June 2019 School Leaders Teachers Quarterly Surveys & State of the School Address to hear staff concerns and provide next steps Student results on end of unit assessments and ability measured on daily lessons using formative assessments; conferring sheets, checklists, discussion meters; etc. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration will provide Coffee with the Principal sessions, to support the parent community with updating them on current practices and instructional supports currently being offered to teachers. Through these sessions, administration and the parent community will foster a relationship rooted with the academic progress of their child, and support a forum for open discussions. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We utilize per-session and per diem for human resources. We incorporate curriculum resources, consumables, Leverage Leadership Books, Teachboost License, DRA2 online assessment tool, Teach Like A Champion books and instructional supplies. For example, books, iPads, laptops, markers and calculators. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 52  X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, the Instructional Leadership Team will support teachers through professional learning to enable teachers’ lesson plans to represent point of view, inference and the application of concept development in math problem solving as measured by a 10% increase in teachers’ effective ratings in “Designing Coherent Instruction" component 1e in Danielson to advance measurable results in scholars work. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Framework-Domain 1; Components 1e Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 53  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths: The school faculty consistently engages in parent outreach regarding student academics and community resources. Teachers work collaboratively during common planning to revise and refine curriculum. Teacher teams use the backwards design model to collaboratively plan units. Needs: Additional work is needed to increase parental participation that is aligned to student progress and data analysis to better understand school documents (ex: IEPs). Our priority is to ensure that the parents and families are aware of their child’s progress and have knowledge of curriculum to support their children at home. Moreover, we still need to strengthen the inquiry and improvement processes to develop more rigorous curricula for Students with Disabilities and English and Language Learners. According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review conducted in May 2018; the school has a need to better inform parents and K-6 students on the meaning of College and Career Readiness, access to college readiness materials and support on the pathways from middle school to high school and to college or trades needed to obtain a living wage in a career. Reflections: The school leader has regular communication with students and parents through morning routines, meetings, weekly email blasts to the parents, and written communication. The Parent Coordinator send outs daily phone messages. The 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 54  school provides wake up calls and uses the KINVO application to maintain constant contact. This will continue for the 2018-2019 school year, to ensure their timely arrival at school. Other mechanisms for communication include attractive signs in the building, monthly Parent Newsletters, monthly calendars, letters to parents and students. Parents will have opportunities to share ideas through the bi-monthly Parent Breakfast and the ongoing cycles of workshops afforded to the parents. School data is shared with the parents via mail and presentations. Opportunities are needed for our parents to understand the data and ask questions that can support their children. This structure brings our parents closer to the academic expectations of our school and to understand the instructional implications of the data, and ultimately, its impact on student learning. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? Our vision is to welcome all families into our school through Family-School-Community Partnerships. Our school is a family centered, Community School with the goal to improve the school’s overall relationship with families and the community in promoting student learning. P.S. 111Q welcomes parents and other family members as decision makers, collaborators, volunteers, communicators, instructors, and advocates in their children’s learning. The school has a Family Room for our parents and community to meet. Learning Leaders and Parents as Partners are organizations that support our parents through parent empowerment to be more grounded in academics and college and career readiness. We reach out to families in many ways (ex: weekly email, text, calls, mail, website) to: o Involve more families, especially families of diverse backgrounds o Improve the academic achievement and behavior of more students o Enjoy greater support from parents, staff members, and the community Welcoming Environment: From the moment parents enter the building, School Safety Agents (SSA) are trained to greet all guests and provide a welcoming atmosphere. Our Main Office staff are friendly, knowledgeable, and able to communicate with our families in English and Spanish, our families’ main languages. The school regularly updates posters and information flyers to keep families updated about upcoming events and relevant resources. Parenting: Build on parenting strengths and help families improve parenting skills. Facilitate support systems and networks to enable families to effectively nurture their children. Communicating: Promote clear two-way communication between schools and families regarding school programs and children’s progress. Communication should be to families both individually and collectively. Schools should encourage and make it easy for families to communicate to the school about their children. Volunteering: Recruit and organize family and community members as volunteers. A wide variety of volunteer opportunities should be available at different times and locations to make it possible for everyone to volunteer. Volunteers should have a clear understanding of their roles and the school should recognize their commitment. Learning at Home: Provide for families and school staff to work together to establish and communicate learning goals for students. Develop strategies to help families reinforce children’s learning at home and in the community that support academic achievement. Decision making enables parents to deeply participate in their children’s learning. Give families opportunities to offer opinions and ideas about school programs.Engage Community and Families/ Teachers Learn About Children From Families: Improve our partnership in learning and awareness of the needs of our families. Increase community awareness of academics, talents, health and wellness by asking families what they need help with and connecting with partners to address family needs. We are partnering with community merchants to support and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 55  celebrate our students through a school-wide incentives program. Students are awarded incentives based on their academic achievement and school community service. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Within the Community School Model families will be welcomed on a daily basis. Our Family Room is a dedicated space for families, teachers and partners to interact. The school leaders have provided laptops, social and emotional services through our partnerships, information pamphlets, books, telephones and other tools in the Family Room to support our parents. Our school exercises an "Open Door" policy which is supported by school leaders that provide parents the arena to collaborate with teachers on their child's academic, behavioral and social progress. The Parent Coordinator, Community School Director and Parent Association leaders will develop a survey in English and parents native language to identify additional services, topics, events, venues and best times to conduct parent activities. The surveys will be issued in December. Families will be supported through collaborative partnerships with teachers, school administration, the lead CBO, the Parent Coordinator, the Parent Association, and community partners. Parents are connected to school and community-based resources that strengthen families and support children’s learning and development. We will provide opportunities for the school staff, families, and students to contribute to the community through meetings, workshops, and events. The School Family Room supports partnerships with families and sends a strong message that they are an important part of the fabric of the school. The Family Room can support school efforts in all six types of partnerships and serve as a “home base” by providing planning and storage space for the school’s partnership efforts and offer families a friendly place to make contact with their school and community members. Our school has a well-established SLT to offer parents many opportunities to be involved in the life of the school, from screening candidates for instructional volunteers, ESL classes, volunteer teaching positions to reducing lateness and improving attendance. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Families will be engaged through collaborative partnerships with teachers, school administration, the lead CBO, the Parent Coordinator, the Parent Association, and community partners. We will provide opportunities for the school staff, families, and students to contribute to the community through meetings, workshops, and events. We will also partner with local businesses and institutions to expose our families to collaborate outside of the school parameters. The school works to develop the capacities of family members to take leadership and decision making roles to support their children’s learning. We leverage the students' successes and their need for supports to encourage the parents. The parents are empowered through our welcoming environment. Provide Support to Families Parents are connected to resources in the school and community that strengthen families and support children’s learning and development. We provide opportunities for the school and students to contribute to the community. The School Family Center support partnerships with families and send a strong message to families that they are an important part of the fabric of the school. The center is a “home base” for partnerships. The center provides planning and storage space for the school’s partnership efforts and offers families a friendly place to make contact with their 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 56  school and community members. Each school within the building must decide how its family center is used to encourage family-school partnerships. For example, we can establish parent rooms as one of several initiatives that link homes with the school system. Our school has a well-established SLT to offer parents many opportunities to be involved in the life of the school, from screening candidates for instructional volunteers, ESL classes, volunteer teaching positions to reducing lateness and improving attendance and participate and host college and career forums. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? Families will be engaged through collaborative partnerships with teachers, school administration, the lead CBO, the Parent Coordinator, the Parent Association, and community partners. We will provide opportunities for the school staff, families, and students to contribute to the community through meetings, workshops, and events. We will also partner with local businesses and institutions to expose our families to collaborate outside of the school parameters. Within the school, we host events such as Pep Rallies, Basketball Games, Spirit Week, Check in Check out Program, Attendance Workshops, Family Nights, to engage families and bring them closer to school staff. Such events allow families and staff to come together and enjoy the presence of the scholars in a less restrictive environment, and encourages positive feedback between teachers and parents. Teachers also have set Parent Engagement Periods built into their schedules during which they can reach out to parents regarding students glows and grows, do in-person meetings, send out letters, texts, or emails etc. Having time set solidly for parent engagement allows teachers to learn about the scholars’ families and what works best for the student both academically and socially. In addition, there are more formal settings, such as Scholar-Led-Conferences and Community School Forums during which parents, scholars, and teachers can meet to address individual student needs. For our scholars who are ELL, or SWD or have IEPs, we have an IEP Director, social workers, and a ENL Coordinator to help our parents better understand the differentiation that occurs in the classrooms in order for scholars to learn best and exceed their benchmarks. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Translated Documents, Emails, School Messages Demonstrate cultural sensitivity and respect Share student data Empower parents to participate in school through academic partnerships; College and Career Readiness through College Access for All Monthly Social Events Bridge the gap between home and school How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Food Bank SmileDental group Family partnerships with CBO: City Harvest Family Nutrition and Cooking Class Parents as dance Partners 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 57  Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes; The school has a family/Community Room for all family events What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? We will develop partnerships with the library and/or other adult education providers as we see the need and receive feedback. We strive to develop connections and build capacities for parents, including as simply as welcoming them to be an integral part of their child’s education. Welcome Families into School Community We will welcome all families into our school through Family-School-Community Partnerships. Our school will be a family centered, Community School and will improve the school’s overall relationship with families and the community in promoting student learning. CS111Q will welcome parents and other family members as decision makers, collaborators, volunteers, communicators, instructors, and advocates in their children’s learning. The school has a Family Room for our parents and community to meet. Academic Parent Teacher Teams, Learning Leaders and Parents as Partners will support our parents. We will reach out to families in many ways to: o Involve more families, especially families of diverse backgrounds o Improve the academic achievement and behavior of more students o Enjoy greater support from parents, staff members, and the community School Safety Agents (SSA ) School Safety Agents (SSA) are trained to greet the parents and all guests in our building and provide a welcoming atmosphere. Communication to the staff is ongoing. Teachers and staff members feel free to stop in and ask questions of the school leaders, coaches and teacher leaders periodically throughout the day. We also communicate to the SSA through the Special Events and Professional Learning Weekly. The Weekly provides for uninterrupted instructional time by eliminating the need for the use of the intercom system. The Weekly also creates a level of transparency throughout our school with our Safety Agents. Center for Supportive Schools was selected as the lead Community Based Organization to spearhead the Renewal Community School efforts at CS111Q. Our Implementation partners for the 2018-2019 will include Asthma Case Management Program (ACMP), City Harvest, Community Word Project, Counseling in Schools, Jacob A. Riis Settlement House COMPASS/SONYC Afterschool Program, The Leadership Program, Learning through an Expanded Arts Program (LeAP), Lincoln Center, NYU ParentCorps, Smile, St. John’s Gear Up, Americorps Success Mentoring, Teen Thursdays, and Warby Parker Vision Screening. Participation through our various programs promotes academic learning, team building and social emotional growth for both our scholars and their families. Through our work with partners like Counseling in Schools, we also provide social emotional professional development for staff. The school team will measure social emotional development by reduced anger, anxiety, and aggression from students in their caseloads and SLCs. Students will exhibit a more positive attitude towards school that can be measured with increased attendance and extracurricular activities. Social emotional growth and higher order thinking skills will be measured by improved grades and increased credit accumulation. It can also be measured by increased student participation in leadership and school community events. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 58  For the 2018-2019 school year, teachers will participate in professional development activities that will deepen their ability to strengthen social emotional development in the classroom, including Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools and a Community Building Retreat in October. Guidance counselors and social workers will continue to provide in class presentations to students. Professional developments topics for classroom strategies and in class topics will address the needs of the data presented. Additionally, we will promote and increase programs that are providing positive outcomes and redesign activities that are not producing desired outcomes. Attendance rates will be improved and chronic absenteeism will be reduced by increased student centered activities and celebrations. Through collaboration with Center for Supportive Schools, home visits to increase parental engagement will help address some of the needs of the chronically absent students, which include referrals to SCO and community agencies. Accuracy of the attendance will be monitored regularly by generating and distributing to teachers various reports for confirmation. Weekly attendance meetings will be held with key players to make sure attendance meets or surpasses the year’s benchmarks, that chronic absenteeism is reduced, and that positive attendance behaviors are recognized, publicized, and celebrated. Differentiated student attendance support and engagement will consist of the following: a. Students with good attendance are rewarded and recognized b. Students with borderline attendance are monitored weekly. If a student’s weekly attendance falls below the year-to-date average, he or she is flagged for intervention. Weekly reports are generated and distributed. c. Long Term Absences identification is reviewed. The attendance teachers, the school family workers, the community associate, Success Mentor, and guidance counselors focus a large part of their attendance work on this group. d. Automated phone calls are generated, one to wake up students, one to let families know if students are absent/late. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Teachers have set Parent Engagement Periods built into their schedules during which they can reach out to parents regarding students glows and grows, do in-person meetings, send out letters, texts, or emails etc. Having time set solidly for parent engagement allows teachers to learn about the scholars’ families and what works best for the student both academically and socially. In addition, there are more formal settings, such as Scholar-Led-Conferences and Community School Forums during which parents, scholars, and teachers can meet to address individual student needs. For our scholars who are ELL, or SWD or have IEPs, we have an IEP Director, social workers, and a ENL Coordinator to help our parents better understand the differentiation that occurs in the classrooms in order for scholars to learn best and exceed their benchmarks. The school also tracks attendance records for each day and each event, and provides progress reports/report cards during parent teacher conferences. ATS attendance reports are also mailed home to families and explained in person and in writing, with contact information provided for further inquiries. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 59 the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the administrative team will support the PTA and Center for Supportive Schools with increasing of parental representation as measured by an increase of attendance at all parental engagements including the Annual Community School Forum. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Framework for Great Schools: Collaborative Teachers Attendance 91.4 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 60  Part 4 – Action Plan Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Attendance 91.4 September 2018 Teacher Leader-Community Team and PBIS Team October 2018 Attendance Sheets Attendance 91.4 September 2018-June 2019 Teacher Leader-Community Team and PBIS Team Quarterly Surveys Framework for Great Schools: Collaborative Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teacher Leader-Community Team and PBIS Team Quarterly Surveys Analyze Learning Environment Survey to collect data to determine success. Two nights are set aside. Activities are provided for scholars In order for parents to complete surveys. There is a movie in auditorium, and an arts and crafts activity. After completing the survey parents and children are able to have a light refreshments. Activities are hosted by school staff. Encourage Parent Participation in P.B.I.S. events through translated versions of invitations and personalized invitations from their children. Develop and select content, tools, and model of delivery for quality professional development for our parents that link to student achievement. Create a system of Best Practices -Oral/Written Communications, create and maintain welcoming physical environment. Parents & Guardians Students All teachers and teacher assistants Parents & Guardians Students All teachers and teacher assistants Parents & Guardians Students All teachers and teacher assistants 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 61 Framework for Great Schools: Collaborative Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teacher Leader-Community Team and PBIS Team Quarterly Surveys Parents & Guardians Students All teachers and teacher assistants Establish a system of recognition and parent accountability through learning walks with the parents. Establish parent support for school uniforms to communicate that the students are part of an academic and social team. Parent Workshops: Parents are given a needs and wants questionnaire. Based on results workshops are provided in the areas of arts, curriculum, ENL classes, nutritional, mental health provided by outside agencies. Depending on timing for workshops breakfast, lunch or dinner are provided. Teachers will plan workshops to enable parents will learn about the purpose of the scholar work and its impact for future College and Career Readiness. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize per-session and per diem for human resources. We will incorporate curriculum resources, consumables and instructional supplies. For example, books, office furniture, Family Room furniture, bookcases, file cabinets, hole punchers, incentive charts, Scholar Dollar items, crayons, Glogster subscription, school uniforms, desks, tables, chairs, iPads, laptops, markers and calculators. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF X X Title I SWP Title III X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant Title I TA PTA Funded 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 62  Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019: surveys to parents will communicate a 5% increase in satisfaction of the topics and ideas of interest to them to and improved knowledge on college and career readiness and next steps be implemented during the remainder of the school year with the overall goal in increased attendance at parent workshops and forums. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Post program surveys, workshop participation. and attendance sheets Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 63  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 1. By the end of June 2019, there will be an increase in student social-emotional development (academic self-efficacy, growth mindset, grit, emotional competence, and self-regulation) of at least 50% of the student population as measured by attendance and post program surveys that increase student focus in the classroom. 2. By the end of June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in parent participation in school activities, as measured by attendance metrics, by post surveys and by focus groups that lead to measurable progress in the classroom Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Actively encourage participation in Renewal Hour through the use of i-Ready and myON technology resources. Attendance is mandatory during ELT. The technology and gaming components maintain their interest using i-Ready and myOn. We also have partnerships such as the Jacob A. Riis program, Museum of the Moving Image, and City Harvest to collaborate with tecahers to provide students with learning alternatives and incentives for the end of the school day. The School Leadership Team will continue to institute and support the P.B.I.S. Rotations twice per year to acclimate new and returning scholars with the CS 111 A.R.M.OR. protocol, procedures and routines. The SLT, in conjunction with the PA, will coordinate at least one new parents’ event to welcome and acclimate parents to the school. Throughout the school year, newly admitted scholars will participate in monthly New Scholar activities facilitated by P.B.I.S. team members. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 64  How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? In collaboration with the school administration and SLT, Center for Supportive Schools intends to leverage existing school partnerships and bring new partnerships into P.S. 111Q. CSS will distribute student and parent surveys to ascertain what families/students' interest areas and needs are to promote college and career readiness and parent engagement. The range of programming includes, but is not limited to, academic and enrichment activities, socio-emotional skill development, youth development, and wellness programs. Current partnership with Jacob Riis through NYC DYCD COMPASS and SONYC contracts provide academic and enrichment program for over 150 students. The program includes tutoring, homework help, project-based learning (Math, Literacy, Science, Technology), art, dance, and martial arts, to name a few. Center for Supportive Schools will provide other socio-emotional, academic, and instructional help through programs such as Lincoln Center, Learning through the Expanded Arts Program, Ailey in the Arts, City Harvest, Community Word Project, The Leadership Program. Other new content areas, besides socio-emotional development, being introduced at P.S. 111Q include nutrition, environmental sciences, adult education, and summer programs. The ELT schedule chosen by P.S. 111Q, 60 minutes for Professional Development, remains as scheduled on Mondays for all the staff, including socio-emotional skills, cultural competency, and parent engagement strategies. Parent Engagement and Other Professional Work on Tuesdays for those teachers working with the ELT is done before or after the day on Tuesday or on an alternate day. Center for Supportive Schools, the school, and community partners conduct extensive family outreach in the form of calls to the home, backpack mailers, home outreach, and other engagement tactics shaped by Dr. Karen Mapp's family engagement trainings. Center for Supportive School will assists the school in developing a marketing plan to raise the level of awareness of the school’s activities in becoming a Community School. The marketing plan includes the creation of brochures, hosting community events, hosting parent events and workshops, and intentional social media strategies. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 65  Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. The Renewal Hour is collaboratively designed with the P.S. 111Q school administration, SLT, and CSS. CSS is responsible for the coordination, implementation, and evaluation of the Renewal Hour. The structure is as follows: ● Creation of a Community School Team (CST) which include the principal, assistant principal, SLT members, CSS leadership (Executive Director, Director of Collective Impact Partnerships, Community School Director), CBO partners, and community leaders. ●Center for Supportive Schools Community School Director (CSD) oversees the day-to-day implementation and coordination of the various CBO partner programs. The Director conducts monthly meetings with the CST team to inform progress and illicit dialogue for continuous improvement. ● Attendance and assessment data will be utilized as measures of program and service progress on a weekly basis ● The CBO partner programs are evaluated quarterly using the NYSAN (New York State After School Network) Program Quality Assessment tool http://www.p12.nysed.gov/sss/21stCCLC/NYSAN_Self_Assessment_Tool.pd Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Summer 2018: Planning and preparation, including programming and professional development, between Principal, CBO, lead teachers, and DSR. Fall 2018: Continue professional development for ELT, assign teachers and courses/activities according to student/family surveys. Notify students and Parents. Collect data; attendance, assessments, etc. Early Spring 2018: assess sucess of program to date, make adjustments as needed. ELT will begin the first week of school (September 5th, 2018) and will end in June 2019, Task: Evaluation of ELT progress: Program Quality Assessments of each CBO partner; CST meetings; Socio-emotional growth; Individual CBO program evaluation results Date: Program Quality Assessments (Quarterly: September 2018, December 2018, March 2019, June 2019); CST meetings (monthly); Socio-emotional growth; pre-survey at the beginning of programs/post-survey (at end of program); End of program report; attendance, retention, academic and/or socio-emotional impact. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. We utilize per-session and per diem for human resources. We incorporate curriculum resources, consumables, trip costs, trips and instructional supplies. For example, Basketball team, motivation assemblies, books, Fuse Dance Consultants, costumes, Basketball league and referee fees, keyboards, border, trays, caddies, art supplies, read aloud chair, library furniture, chart paper, bulletin board paper, labels, toner, copy paper, publishing paper, notebooks, batteries, Jenga, blindfolds, music stands, equalizers, extension cords, guitars, drum set, iPads, laptops, markers and calculators. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 66  Community school partners Community School Director Expanded Learning Time Push in Partners, including Riis Dean of School Culture, Teacher Coaches Teachers Guidance Counselor Additional counseling services, professionals, and programs Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy X Title III X Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside C4E X SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By February 2019, 80% of students will be able to communicate effective social strategies as evidenced on the school administered survey. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Vision Students Sorter - Data Analysis Tool ELA and Math mock exam scores; ELA and Math 2017 NYS exam scores; quarterly grades Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 67  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. C.S. 111 Q will improve attendance to 91.5%, and increase Math and ELA testing proficiency by 2%. The Community School Director will work with school leadership and support staff to establish more robust attendance systems/structures. CSD will build the capacity of attendance team members to facilitate and reinvigorate Student Success Team Meetings. CSD will implement an evidence based intervention that supports school transitions by leveraging older students as leaders and mentors for incoming middle school students, known as Peer Group Connection. Our school will ensure mental health, wellness, and social services collaborate and identify all students needs. Programs like Peer Group Connection will identify the varied needs of students and/or give referrals. To offer year-round food options, the CSD will coordinate the Community School Food Pantry and summer meals. Also, our community school will offer healthy life and food preparation programs through partnerships with City Harvest, Community Garden, and Fresh Fruits and Veggies Program. CSD will help strengthen partnerships between Counseling In Schools, the Social Worker, the Counselor, the Asthma specialists, and the Nurse to identify disengagement, trauma, and unidentified needs. CS 111Q will strive to keep families connected and involved in student’s education by signing up more families to Kinvolved; analyze Kinvolved data to find our best communication strategies; and set up a system with Attendance Teams that effectively uses Kinvolved to prevent chronic absenteeism. CSD’s will seek out focus groups with parents who do not use Kinvolved and/or who stopped using it. To strengthen family ties and ensure meaningful community engagement strategies, the CSD will help build capacity amongst the Community School Team and parent leaders, and encourage community members to drive Community School improvement strategies. CS 111Q will also host three forums on Culture, College & Career and increase parent participation on school survey 15%. Our school will develop improvement strategies and establish new partnerships according to feedback and leadership of youth, families, community, and educator forums. To ensure that the needs of students in grades PreK-8 are met, collaboration in every phase of instruction and assessment will be emphasized. This collaboration will support the alignment of curriculum and instruction to Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS ) in the content areas. Through collaboration with the administration, teacher teams, parent coordinator, other school-level staff, social emotional service providers, CBO linkages, and CBO subcontractors, students will have ample opportunities to experience new learning strategies, engage in enrichment activities, and experience social emotional development. By the end of the school year, the school will demonstrate progress in meeting the benchmarks moving a greater percentage of students into levels 3 and 4 on standardized tests in ELA and math. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance Benchmark: 91.4 Part 2 – Community School Program Description 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 68  Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service NYU Parent Corp. Parents of Pre-K-K Class lessons NYU Friends School City Harvest Pre-K-K K-4 Parents Counseling in Schools PreK-8 Students Parent Workshops Cooking Classes Nutrition and Health Classes Social and Emotional health All parents and teachers Classroom Management Asthma Case Management Program PreK-8 Students City Harvest Catch K-1st City Harvest Cooking Matters 3rd City Harvest Cooking Matters for Adults Parents Community Word Project 1st-2nd Asthma interventions for students and families Nutrition education program for K-1st grade students Nutrition education program for 3rd grade students Nutrition education program for parents Arts residency focused on theater and writing Jacob A. Riis K-8 Afterschool program The Leadership Program K/1, 2nd-4th, 5th, 7-8th Learning through an Expanded Arts Program Pre K Lincoln Center Smile College Access for All Success Mentoring 6-8th PreK-8 6-8th K-8 Warby Parker Vision Screening Pre K-8 Violence prevention program through leadership intervention Afterschool arts program that teaches students skills in the main core areas through the arts Theater arts through experiential learning Free bi-yearly dental screening/cleaning Guide pathways to college and careers Attendance help, targeting students within 80-90% Free yearly eye screening. Students will receive glasses as needed. Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the 2. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 69  3. 4. right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. Center for Supportive Schools (CSS) will be the school’s lead CBO partner. In partnership with the school, CSS has hired a Community School Director. The Director is responsible for the day-to-day management of the community school strategy, facilitating and providing leadership for the collaborative process of developing a continuum of services for children, families, and community members. The Director will drive development of community school action plans and planning for sustainability. She will track the school’s progress against performance goals, collect school data, and support program evaluation activities and manage partnerships. The Director will ensure that the community school strategy is implemented at exceptional levels of quality with full support, buy-in, and regular communication with stakeholders across the school community. CSS will focus not only in increasing student engagement and parent involvement in the schools, but also in creating strong ties in the community with elected officials, public housing Resident Tenant Associations, and local businesses. The Community School Team will be comprised of the Principal, the Community School Director, the Parent Coordinator, educators, families and other important community members.  Build and maintain relationships with administration, faculty, staff, students, parents, and community partners  Organize and expand upon the membership of the Community School Team (CST) to include diverse school community stakeholders and CBOs  Conduct a needs assessment process, including: reviewing school and student-level data; conducting focus groups with parents, students, faculty, staff, administrators, and community partners; and reviewing and/or conducting school climate and culture survey  Conduct a community asset assessment to identify viable partnerships that can meet the needs of students and families of the school community, including developing metrics for partnership evaluation  Recruit and develop partnership agreements with people and community organizations willing to offer  programs and services for students and families at the school in accordance with identified needs Identify evidence and research-based practices and/or partnerships that address priority areas for the community school strategy, which may include but are not limited to: Parent/Family Engagement; Community Engagement; Youth Development; Academic Rigor and Instructional Practices; Health and Mental Health; Tutoring; After school programming; and Mentoring.  Develop, maintain, and publicize a schedule of programs and activities offered at the school  Implement and maintain a process that encourages referrals to programs and services offered at the school and collaboration among partners Identify needs of chronically absent students, apply interventions, and track and monitor impact on a weekly basis, as part of the weekly Student Success Summit   Collect and monitor program implementation data and student data for each partnership that allow easy data analysis and interaction by the SLT and other school stakeholders  CSS, in partnership with the school, will assess all students’ personalized needs to ensure appropriate  programming opportunities are provided within the school day and during Expanded Learning Time (ELT). In-school support for students will be provided through the integration of one or more of CSS’s core solutions that provide an integrated focus on academic, social, and emotional learning, such that every student and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 70  family has strong relationships with the school community and an individualized pathway to success. Specific student supports implemented may include: Implement an evidence-based intervention that supports school transitions by leveraging older students as leaders and mentors for new and incoming students (Peer Group Connection).  Working with the principal, SLT, and CST, CSS will identify specialist partnerships to provide comprehensive expanded learning and enrichment opportunities, and mental health services to meet the needs of all students. CSD will implement Peer Group Connection and Achievement mentorship, continue partnerships, and develop grants to establish targeted solutions. The CSD will develop new partnerships that provide services from cradle-to-career. Most our partnerships will have either leveraged funding or take part in a co-fundraising strategies to scale programs and services, as well as buy in from partners. CSS will continue collaborations with Jacob A. Riis Neighborhood Settlement House to continue the Renewal Hour program. Together, we will coordinate and evaluate the continued implementation and progress of the Renewal Hour and mental health/wellness components. The Renewal Hour will have programs focused on academics (literacy, math, and science), socio-emotional development, youth development, and enrichment through the arts. The mental health/wellness program at CS 111Q will have Counseling in Schools as the mental health provider. City Harvest will introduce nutrition and cooking. CS 111Q will have referral services available via the Floating Hospital and Jacob A. Riis Neighborhood Settlement House to provide the other health services, such as the asthma van, vision, etc. Evaluations of collaboration across partners will examine how specific partnerships and communication strategies affect referrals, attendance, and academic achievement. Moreover, the school’s current partnerships with CBOs such as Counseling in Schools will be expanded to supplement ELT. In addition, CSS and the school will identify and implement additional partnerships to provide ELT academic support in Math and ELA. All parents will be engaged in parent-teacher conferences at designated times during the school year. Nevertheless, families will also have opportunities to visit classrooms and engage in first-hand experience of their child’s academic learning throughout the year. Parents will be invited to participate in monthly Community School Team meetings, focus groups, and other forums where they can contribute their voices to the conversations and decision-making processes around the renewal of their schools. Workshops provided for parents, by the Parent Coordinator, CSS, and other community partners will focus on helping them learn how to advocate for their children. We also engage parents through our school receivership hearing, where the public provides feedback and develops recommendations for improvement of the school. This year’s recommendations include:  Exploring viable partnerships in vocal, visual and theater Arts.  Planning parent breakfasts to provide background information on Jacob Blackwell. The Community School Director will conduct a weekly standing meeting with the Principal, Assistant Principal, key staff, and representatives from other CBO partners, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. The Director will provide a data summary for the team to review at each meeting. Each team member will also come prepared to discuss key questions and updates in areas of community school work where they are taking initiative. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 71  Center for Supportive Schools, in collaboration with PS/IS 111Q Renewal Schools team will select a Community School Director that fits both the school and CBO culture. The CSD along with CSS, Executive Director and Director of Collective Impact Partnerships will sit on the School Leadership Team (SLT). CSS will continue to support the portfolio of 17 partner organizations that provide services from cradle-to-career that have either leveraged funding or take part in a co-fundraising strategy to scale programs and services. CSS, in collaboration with Jacob A. Riis Neighborhood Settlement House via the NYC DYCD COMPASS & SONYC contracts will work together along with PS/IS 111Q to implement the Renewal Hour program. The evaluative tools created for PS/IS 111Q will measure the degree to which the home-school relationship evolves based on parent/guardian involvement in school decision-making processes; buy-in and participation in the community school process; quality and quantity of contact between school and home; and willingness to pursue services offered. For students, the evaluative tools measure changes in socio-emotional competencies (including, academic, self-efficacy, growth mindset, grit, emotional competence, and self-regulation); school connectedness; leadership skills; and academic performance after participating in community school programming. All indicators and measures were designed based on the community schools goals, created by the New York City Department of Education. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Center for Supportive Schools, in collaboration with CS 111Q Renewal Schools team, selected a new Community School Director who fits both the school and the Center for Supportive School’s culture. The CST and the CSD will evaluate programs according to how effectively they provide direct services, improve students' socio-emotional development, and enhance capacity, equity and collaboration among students, educators and community leaders. Moreover, the evaluative tools created for CS 111Q will measure the degree to which the home-school relationship evolves based on parent/guardian involvement in school decision-making processes; buy-in and participation in the community school process; quality and quantity of contact between school and home; and willingness to pursue services offered. For students, the evaluative tools measure changes in socio-emotional competencies (including, academic, self-efficacy, growth mindset, grit, emotional competence, and self-regulation); school connectedness; leadership skills; and academic performance after participating in community school programming. All indicators and measures will be collaboratively designed based on the community schools goals, created by the New York City Department of Education. CSD will share evaluations and progress during the CST monthly team meetings to reinforce best practices and drive continuous improvement. CSS will host at least three yearly forums and inquiry convenings to the community of Long Island City. The CSD will ensure - in all venues - that youth parents/guardians and community members have a voice, improve their leadership capacities, and share resources. Attendance will be monitored, peer leadership and mentoring programs will be developed, and outreach practices improved to ensure progressive increases in attendance and student achievement. CSD’s will facilitate meetings with CBO partner organizations to create an Implementation Action Plan. The plan will include a program description, expected outcomes, evaluation methodology, and program launch logistic details. CSD will oversee progress of each CBO partner program launch progress. Interests and needs surveys will be conducted by CSD to ensure proper planning. Bi-yearly Program Quality assessments will be conducted by CSD. Center for Supportive Schools (CSS) in partnership with school leadership will implement community school programs and provide oversight. Key personnel include:  Ms. Hella Abebe, Community School Director (CSD) from the Center for Supportive Schools, will drive the day-to-day implementation of Community School programs, as described above.  Ms. Dionne Jaggon, Principal, will provide general oversight and will participate in all SLT and CST meetings. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 72   Ms. Guzman, Assistant Principal, will provide general oversight and will participate in SLT and CST meetings. In addition, she will support the implementation of Peer Group Connection (PGC) and work with CSS to ensure that ELT partnerships are serving and meeting the needs of targeted students  Ms. Joachim, our Parent Coordinator will be a leader in outreaching and engaging parents in monthly forums, supporting parents in leveraging our Parent Center, engaging them in workshops and leadership opportunities in the school community, and matching families to community services to meet their needs.  Representatives from partners will provide monthly reports on progress and challenges to the CST in accordance with their service agreements where applicable. The joint ELT program will be structured as follows:  Teachers will have the opportunity to propose and implement ELT opportunities for students throughout the school year in response to student needs. Teachers will work with CSS and school leadership to access appropriate resources and curricula to support their ELT work.  Partners will be engaged to provide ELT beyond that which is provided by teachers and to supplement teacher-led ELT in targeted areas.  Teaching artists through organizations including but not limited to Counseling in Schools, will be engaged to provide engaging creative arts content through projects-based learning opportunities during ELT.  CSS will require all partners to submit monthly impact reports assessing program quality based upon measures defined in the partnership agreements. These reports will serve as an ongoing common framework for communication between the CSS and the school and partners.  CSS will use a variety of mechanisms to track progress. Data will be presented on each outcome in Community School Team and School Leadership Team meeting within a "data snapshot" where the comprehensive data can be viewed in one dashboard view. This data will be used to assess progress towards meeting the above defined outcomes and to address challenges if outcomes are not being met. Specific ways to track progress for key outcomes include: o Successful implementation and operation of the Community School Team will be tracked based on: representative composition from all community stakeholders; number of members committed to the team compared to average meeting attendance; evaluations completed after CST meetings that assess the extent to which each member finds the meetings to be well-managed, collaborative, and productive. Increased parent engagement will be tracked based on: participation in Parent Association meetings; participation in ongoing needs assessment and feedback activities; participation in parent services provided; the number of parents who assume specific roles in the Community Schools effort; participation in parent-teacher conferences; teachers who report developing positive relationships with parents through weekly phone calls and other means of communication; parents who report developing positive relationships with teachers through weekly phone calls and other means of communication. Increased student participation in expanded learning and enrichment activities will be tracked based on: attendance in activities; inventory and evaluation of services and activities provided; the number of students who assume leadership roles in expanded learning and enrichment activities. Increased utilization rates for mental health services and improved mental health will be tracked based on: the number and demographics of students and families that participate in services compared to the entire target population; frequency of support utilized compared with recommended frequency of support provided; evaluations from students and families reporting on perceived impact of services; student academic performance data improvements and other on-track indicator improvements. Increased school resources will be tracked based on: the estimated value of in-kind services rendered; targeted students served before and after implementation of community school strategy and estimated cost per student; and value of additional resources generated for the school to provide community school services and support by CSS and/or other CBO partners. o o o o Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 73   Hiring of Community School Director July 02, 2018  Task: Identify and recruit P.S. 111Q Community School task force members  Program and service delivery planning and assessments, to include the compilation of School Quality Data   and the development of a Community School Resource Map, assessment tools, and Community School Workplan July 05 through July 30, 2018 Identify existing partner programs taking place in summer and create action plans (July 15) Summer programming, including mandated summer school and Jacob Riis Summer Camp July 05 - August 9, 2018 Implementation Partners Planning Meeting July 6th through July 31st, 2018 Finalize subcontractors and MOUs August 1st - Aug 25th Implementation Action Plan Write Ups & Finalization August 06 through August 17, 2018 First day of 2018-2019 school year September 5th, 2018      Establish the community school team and host first meeting September 5th - 10th, 2018  Program Service Delivery Roll Out September 28 through November 06, 2018  Identify target student groups based on attendance, heatmap/student sorter, graduation, credit accumulation, regents, ELA/Math levels and assign interventions September 20th, 2018  Recruit Success Mentors and appoint Lead Success Mentor September 1st - 20th, 2018  Develop yearlong parent engagement plan September 30th  Develop mental health referral protocol and tracking system, and train teachers and staff on referral process September 20th - September 30th Schedule October Collaborative budget planning meeting October 10th, 2018  Develop student engagement plan and calendar October 3rd, 2018   Update assessment data November 15th, 2018  Establish parent, students, community members, and staff focus groups December 5th 2018  Hold collaborative Budget planning meeting and submit modifications February 5th 2019  Hold mid-year assessment meeting February 10th, 2019  Establish CSF Planning Team and begin holding planning meetings March 20th, 2019  Hold community school Forum and establish community school improvement group’s April 26th, 2019  Hold student, staff, and community focus groups to evaluate engagement after forum and progress of school improvement groups May 1st - 15th, 2019  Program service delivery “end of the year” assessment and closure June 20 through June 26, 2018  Last day for students June 26th, 2019 Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 74  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) K -8 students scoring below a 2.5 scale score on the NYS ELA Exam Pre/Post Assessments Running Records RTI Universal Screener Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Guided Reading Small Group During the school day Push in/Pull out Saturday Academy One to One Services are provided Tutoring before and/or afterschool from October –May Teacher’s College Writing Fundations myON Great Leaps ELL Academy ReadyGen Reading Intervention Differentiated Instruction Teachers College Writing Strategies Ready NY English Language Arts Test Prep Mathematics K-8 students scoring below a 2.5 scale score on the NYS Math Exams Pre/Post Assessments Go Math Interventions Mathletics Differentiated Instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Small Group During the school day Push in/Pull out Saturday Academy One to One Services are provided Tutoring before and/or afterschool from October –May 75 Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF RTI Universal Screener Demonstrated need based on teacher observation(s) Pre/Post Unit Assessments Demonstrated need based on teacher observation(s) Pre/Post Unit Assessments Teacher Referrals Observations Ready NY Math Test Prep FOSS Science Support Differentiated Instruction Small Group During the school day Push in/Pull out Saturday Academy One to One Services are provided Hands on Experiments/Labs Buckle Down (Grades 4 & 8) Urban Advantage Guided Reading using non-fiction texts Differentiated Instruction News ELA Based on At-Risk behavior and intensity: before and/or afterschool from October –May Small Group During the school day Push in/Pull out Afterschool One to One Saturday Academy Small Group During the school day Push in Afterschool PBIS Data Analysis Can include- One to One Family (off site) Parent Requests * Peer Mediation Individual Suspensions Mental health screenings * Referral to outside agencies for evaluation and/or treatment Family As per IEP or at risk students determined by the PPT * RIIS Intervention Support * Counseling in Schools As needed and/or determined by guidance counselor, SBST, or an administrator. 76  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) The number of STH students is 70. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Parent Workshops Clothing School Supplies Counseling Food Pantry Dentist SMILE Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 70 out od 340 STUDENTS CURRENTLY ENROLLED 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 77  Parent Workshops Clothing School Supplies Counseling Food Pantry Dentist SMILE 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $6300 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 78  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All of our staff members are highly qualified and certified to teach in their appointed positions. When recruiting teachers for vacancy positions, a team, comprised of administration and teaching staff, interviews and selects teachers with certifications that match our vacancies. If there is a change in teaching assignment, we ascertain that the teacher takes appropriate coursework to meet the certification requirements for their new certification area. All staff is provided with weekly professional learning based on need, which is either self, team, or school-directed. Staff is also encouraged to seek off-site professional learning, view webinars, and facilitate professional learning for their peers. Teachers are informed of leadership opportunities through the DOE and are supported in their professional growth 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development for school leaders, teachers, and paraprofessionals is ongoing, and is based on the needs of staff members. Professional learning is chosen and designed according to self, grade and school identified needs and observed needs as measured by Danielson observations conducted by school leaders. We have established a professional development committee made up of instructional coaches, teachers and paraprofessionals. The professional development committee meets on a monthly basis to discuss the needs of the staff and make recommendations to the principal about professional learning that is needed. Professional learning is then offered at a school-wide level during the contractual professional learning times after dismissal on Mondays. Professional learning is led by school leaders, instructional coaches, team leaders, and teachers. The principal, assistant principal and instructional coaches receive professional development from the Field Support Center (FSC) and from DOE providers. Community School Director receives PD from the Center for Supportive Schools during the whole summer on Mondays (half-days) and Fridays (full-days), and ongoing throughout the year. This PD builds the CSD's capacity to engage families, improve attendance and youth leadership, and partnership management and development. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 79  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Common Core State Standards workshops are provided to Pre-K parents by the administrators and our Pre-K family worker. In addition Pre-K parents are invited to all parent workshops hosted for families from Pre-K to Grade 8. Parent workshops may include topics about: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations, literacy and mathematics. Our Pre-K students attend full school day sessions Monday-Friday from 8:00am-3:30pm. Teachers use a thematic approach to providing students with daily reading, science, social studies, mathematics, writing, art and physical education. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers on the Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) team and administrators met to discuss all the DOE and curriculum based assessment options that were available to us as a school. We selected the assessments that were appropriately aligned to our curricula for Teachers College Reading, Teachers College Writing and Go Math, as well as grade level rubric based performance tasks in order to match CCLS standards. After students take these baseline assessments we use the data to help us make adjustments to our instructional program. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 80  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 262,537.00 N/A 74,719 69,500.00 11,200.00 0 2,007,782.00 X N/A X X X N/A X Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, and 5E N/A Sections 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, and 5E Sections 5A, 5B, 5C, and 5E Sections 5A, 5B, 5C,and 5E N/A Sections 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, and 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 81   A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 82  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 111, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 1`11 will support parents and families of Title I students by:  Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology.  Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress.  Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand.  Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 83  school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact.  Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills.  Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact. Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills.  Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will reach out to families of the entire school population to attend various school activities, identify, recruit and train parents and guardians to participate actively in school decision making structures and in advocating on behalf of their children, and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.  Conduct parent workshops based on the assessed assets and need of the parents and children who attend the school. Topics may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home.  Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESEA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report.  Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under ESEA. Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions.   Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community conducts an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 84  surveys and feedback forms are used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information is maintained by the school. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school: ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact. ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills. ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact. ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills. ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person provides parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator also maintains a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home. ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report. ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions. ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 85  ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. ● Holds an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference. ● Hosts educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year. ● Encourages meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. ● Supports or hosts Family Day events. ● Established a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents. ● Encourages more parents to become trained school volunteers. ● Provides written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Develops and distributes a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress. ● Provides school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 111, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by:  Using academic learning time efficiently.  Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences.   Offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards. by the ESSA. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement are discussed as well as how this Compact is related. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 86  ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved. ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting. ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education. ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand. ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact. ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information. ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents. ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians. ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times are scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend). ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 87  ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents. ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy. ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent. ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age. ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary. ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes). ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games. ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time. ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child. ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits. ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education. ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district. ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested. ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact. ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible. ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams. ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 88  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time. ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time. ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions ● Show respect for myself, other people and property. ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully. ● Create my learning goals with my teacher and work to meet my goals. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 89 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 90  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: In tandem with strategies for ELLs, the Extended Learning Time program will give the scholars an opportunity to make measurable progress in comprehension and fluency through immersion. The Extended Learning Time has been designed to service ELLs from grades K-8. The program will consist of one certified ESL teacher and two content area specialists (ELA and Mathematics). They will teach classes on Monday-Friday from 2:40pm to 3:30pm. This program will begin in September 2018 and conclude in June 2019. The scholars will be assigned to two classes: ELA and Mathematics, on for a total of 180 sessions. The program will be instructed in the English language. Currently, our present ELLs experienced a -3.9% drop in ELA Proficiency on the 2018 NYS ELA exam. For the 2018 Math exam, our ELLs experienced a +3% increase with their overall Math Proficiency. Program Rationale: Currently, our present ELLs experienced a -3.9% drop in ELA Proficiency on the 2018 NYS ELA exam. For the 2018 Math exam, our ELLs experienced a +3% increase with their overall Math Proficiency. With this supplemental program, our scholars will experience a continuation of the instructional support they receive from 8:00am-2:40pm. 2018-2019 ELL Data: Kindergarten: 6 ELLs: 3 Entering, 3 Expanding First Grade: 4 ELLs: 2 Transitional, 1 Expanding, 1 Commanding Second Grade: 2 ELLs: 1 Transitional, 1 Commanding Third Grade: 4 ELLs: 1 Entering, 2 Expanding, 1 Commanding Fourth Grade: 7 ELLs: 2 Entering, Transitional, 2 Expanding, 1 Commanding Fifth Grade: 6 ELLs: 1 Emerging, 1 Transitional, 2 Expanding, 2 Commanding Sixth Grade: 7 ELLs: 2 Emerging, 2 Transitional, 2 Expanding, 1 Commanding Seventh Grade: 5 ELLs: 1 Emerging, 1 Transitional, 1 Expanding, 2 Commanding Eighth Grade: 5 ELLs, 1 Transitional, 2 Expanding, 2 Commanding Through further analysis from the Data Inquiry Team, current structures and practices will continue under the three-tiered planning to learning. This methodical approach ensures that three categories of leveled learning are catered to instructionally, and that sub-populations are represented and accounted for to positively impact student achievement. Additional differentiated support for ELL students, addressing literacy skills in core academic areas, would benefit the academic growth of our ELLs. This program addresses the core subjects of math, ELA, as well as technology. The scholars will engage in skills based activities in literacy. Reading text and applying the various strategies to develop their skills. They will develop their writing using the Writers' workshop model. Exploring the various genres and technology infused instruction. Finally, developing key concepts in mathematics utilizing the Mathletics program. The ESL teacher will provide support equally to each classes he services on Monday - Friday. Scholars will be placed in these classes according to their grade levels. Differentiation will be based on their achievement levels on the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL. Intensive instruction in English language acquisition through the content area and preparation for NYSESLAT testing will be administered using the following software and instructional materials: Instructional Materials and Software Programs 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 91  Mathletics (computer-based) program i-Ready Literacy and Mathletics Literacy: skills-based and Writer's Workshop Imagine&nbsp;Learning - Supplement&nbsp; NYSESLAT&nbsp;testing booklets Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information · · · · · All student work products will be maintained by the ESL teacher and the collaborating classroom teacher. All notifications will be sent in English, with distinction made for parents' preferred language. We have translators on site for Spanish and Bengali. In addition to the 3 teachers, there will be a supervisor on site. The supervisor is being charged to Title III because (as of this writing) no other after-school program is in operation. There will be a Saturday Academy targeting our ELLs. The program will be offered every Saturday from 8:30 - 2:00 pm. This program will be supported with the Imagine Learning Software and teacher created units of study, rooted with language objectives and tailored for the groups of ELLs within their level of mastery. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: This year, The Extended Learning Time teachers and ENL teacher will receive ongoing PD in the content areas. The ENL teacher will also receive customized professional learning from our ENL support person from the state, Ms. Sarah Martinez, which is at no charge. She supports the ENL Coordinator every week. The purpose of our work for the 2018-2019 school year, will delve deeper into identifying and ensuring consistent monitoring of sub-populations, including the following: ELL/SP.ED/SPELLS. The Agendas are maintained in the school office in a binder labeled: Professional Development Binder. During after-school instructional clinics and Professional Learning time on Mondays, the teachers will learn how to apply ESL strategies to their instruction. Professional Development Sessions for the 2018-2019 School year will support the following topics: The following topics will start in November of 2018, and will occur once a month, throughout the school year. · Student Learning · ESL&nbsp;lessons: Speaking, writing, listening, and reading · phrase, sentence, paragraph and discourse · ELL/SP.ED/SPELLS. · Expectations&nbsp; · Mathematics&nbsp; Provider: Administration - Infusing the Hallmarks in Instruction and Application of Understanding the NYSESLAT&nbsp;Writing Rubric and Grade Band Go Math Consultant and C.S. 111 Math Teachers: Conceptualization in Provider: Administration&nbsp; Representing the four modalities of language in Provider: Administration Understanding Language Progressions in Writing: Word, Ongoing: Administration and ENL Coordinator: Collecting and analyzing data for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 92  Field Based Support Liaisons&nbsp; Out-Sources PD Vendors: Teacher's College, and others In-house Administration facilitated Professional Development Turn-Keyed Professional Development from District 30&nbsp; Part C: Professional Development Providers of Professional Development will be facilitated through the following sources: · · · · The Professional Development plan will support our ELLs with working towards demonstrating progress in the written, spoken, reading, and listening modalities of the English language. The overall impact will reflect with an increment of performance on the the NYSESLAT, the NYS ELA and Math exams (if applicable). The teachers participating in extended professional learning are compensated at the per-session rate. Records will be maintained in the main office in the 2018-2019 Professional Development Binder. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: For the 2018-2019 School Year, parents of ENL students will be supported with language support to ensure and accommodate access to the supports offered by Community School 111. Our instructional program will target students with academic challenges and encourage them to engage in proactive activities to build their academic base in literacy and have opportunities for measurable progress in ELA, science social studies and mathematics through the at home reinforcement by and with all the parents. Through our parent/guardian partnerships, we will inform and develop their skill-set with realistic and attainable supports for home and academics; to ensure there is ongoing consistent support aligned to school instructional initiatives. Translation services will be expanded upon, in collaboration with our Community Based Organization, Center for Supportive Schools. All parents of ENLs will be supported with access to the following topics for the 2018-2019 School Year: The following workshops will take place once every other month/monthly and will be planned in collaboration with the administration and Center for Supportive Schools. · · · at home&nbsp; · · · *based on success of established partnership with an ESL teacher to provide services Providers: · · · Various Content Curriculum Access Workshops Establishing Consistent Routines for Learning Expectations Access to the Translated Modules of Engage NY Math Curriculum and how to use them Attendance Matters! Information Workshop NYS&nbsp;ELA&nbsp;and Math Parent Workshop English as a Second Language Workshop for Parents* Field Based Support Liaisons&nbsp;, if applicable In-house Administration facilitated Professional Development Center for Supportive Schools&nbsp; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 93 Out-Sources PD Vendors Parent Coordinator Community School Director, Hella&nbsp;Abede Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · · · Parental Outreach Sources: · · · · · · · Agendas, attendance sheets and invitations are maintained in the school.We need teachers to share their expertise with parents in order to be able to support their children academically. Kinvo&nbsp;App Backpack letters Flyers Posters&nbsp;marketed on school grounds Personal interactions/reminders Parent Coordinator Main Office brochures/pamphlets&nbsp; Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 94  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 95  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name Jacob Blackwell Borough Queens School Number 111 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dionne A. Jaggon Coach Dr. Celeste Rivers ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Carlos Fuentes Teacher/Subject Area Kristine Landberg Teacher/Subject Area Elisa Burke Related-Service Provider Milagors Ruiz Superintendent Dr. Philip A. Composto Assistant Principal Karen E. Guzman Coach Maria De Vicarro School Counselor MaryEllen Tsangalidis Parent Ms. Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Regine Joachim Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 281 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 96 Total number of ELLs 53 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.86%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Lang. NA 1 3 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The early literacy skills of ELL's in grades K-8 are assessed using the DRA2 and I- Ready assessments for all grades IN ELA and Math for fluency and comprehension. Ready ( paper and pencil) is used for grades 3-8 in ELA and Math to assess reading and comprehension. Reading Rescue assesses phonics, phonemic awareness, letter name fluency, nonsense word fluency, comprehension and fluency. Reading Rescue provides teachers with data on students knowledge of phonics, letter sound recognition, and academic sight word vocabulary. Students are placed into ability groupings ( Enrichment, Strategic, Intensive ) for explicit instruction in phonics through guided instruction in small groups and independent practice at learning stations. Teachers College Reading and on Demand writing and post demand writing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have Google Docs. This tool is used to store all ELL's data so all teachers have access to it. Also teachers meet weekly as teachers learners to look at data to inform instruction. Teachers meet as grade and across grades teams. Teachers share 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 97  evidence of students learning, ideas on new resources and instructional practices to support Ell's. In this meeting findings and suggestions are discussed, revised and implemented to prove their effectiveness during lesson execution. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELL instructional program is evaluated through monthly analysis of student work samples to track improvement in academic achievement and language acquisition, student movement from entering -emerging to expanding-transitioning -commanding on the NYSESLAT exam is also used to evaluate the effectiveness of the program. ELL student achievement on the ELA and MATH exams are analyzed to determine increases in ELL students who score level 3 and above as compared to the previous year to track effectiveness of the program. We also review ELL student scale scores on NYS ELA/MATH exams to determine improvement in the number of questions answered correctly. The school also uses portfolio system for all students from K-8 including ELL's. The students complete performance tasks portfolios in ELA and Math, science and social studies that are aligned to the Common Score Standartds and the NYSESLAT expectations. The portfolios requiere the students to think critically to analyze text, answer comprehension based questions and site text evidence. Problem solving, scientific enquire, and content specific language are also enhance through the use of the portfolio summative assessment. During the 2018-19 year we will incorporate an additional summative assessment using the RALLY assessment to use as a base line to look at the date and determine where the students are, new teaching that is needed, and any enrichment or remedia support that should be provided. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our school is a Renewal school, therefore, we have an extra period every day in which we address intervention once the summative data is gathered. Also we support our students with the Reading Rescue initiative which consists in working with students independently to help them improve their reading skills. We also use IReady, Guided Reading, Guided math and small group instruction to support students. The IEP teacher also facilitates RTI groups in reading and language acquisition. Our K-2 teachers and speech teacher execute daily Fundation lessons to support our ELL's with phonemics awareness, phonics, words study and reading fluency. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We look at the RLAT and desegregated the data per grade and class to form instructional groups with similar strengths and needs. We further look the four modalities and develop individualize instructional plan for each students following the WIDA language progression to plan for instructional goals. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use the NYSESLAT, which is a summative test given to ELL's during the month of April. We also look at the ELA test to check for those students that might reach Transitioning in the NYSESLAT and then they can exit the program and become a former ELL. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have the EDAT. After reviewing the EDAT, we will find the students that are Long-term or possible become a Long-term, create a program so they can be supported in all modalities areas. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 98  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for our ELLs consists in ICT and Stand Alone model for grades K-8. Instruction is delivered by the ESL teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. N/A Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? At a minimum, all of our ELLs receive the mandated time of instruction.The ENL teachers' programs are set to meet all mandated requirements in Grades K-8, servicing Expanding and Transitional children for 180 minutes per week, and Entering and Emerging children for 360 minutes per week. Also those students scoring Commanding receive support for 90 minutes per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ELA content is integrated daily in a Co teaching Model. The ENL teachers ICT for one period at the same time the classroom teachers are teaching ELA . It is during this content period, that the ENL teachers provides support in the content area. All children in Grades K-8 participate in Science and Social Studies one - two periods per week; this is being provided by our specialty teachers and ENL teachers. The ENL teacher supports the content area teacher by providing strategies to support, vocabulary and word walls enhanced with visuals. Most of our ENL students are Spanish with some Bengali, Arabic and Urdu. Language and learning objectives are used to provide a greater command of the content and associated vocabulary words. Technology in the form of videos, digital vocabulary cards, in large prints, pictures are also incorporated in lesson execution to support ELL's students. the language objectives involves the four language skills ; speaking, listening, writing and reading that function as scaffold into the topics of each lesson. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish Lab R is the only test we use in Spanish. Beside this, all our ELLS are evaluated in English which is the only language of instruction. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status PS 111Q has no ELLs that fall into category A. Newcomers and ELLs receiving services receive, at least, the minimum of mandated minutes of instruction. Most being on the Entering and Emerging level receive 360 minutes per week. In addition, this year we will create a Cultural Club with ELL's in which they will develop listening and speaking skill since the Club will be in English. Former ELLs continue to receive ENL 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 99  services for two year after they become proficient . ALL ELLS are also invited to participate in ARTS after school and Saturday program to enrich their education experience. For the differentiation of ELL's is data driving based on the result from the I ready, portfolio, Rally and DRA 2 assessment. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ALL classrooms that have ELLs have evidence of best ENL teaching practices: a) visuals abound; in print and viaz the smart board . b) labels increase print awareness. c)Teacher College (W&R). Teachers have been extremely resourceful in incorporating literacy and art activities to enhance the literacy; including online additional readers of the books in the program . d) teachers provide on-line access in Myon so parents can go in and check reading and math levels and determine progress. e) all classrooms are equipped with high interest library books, and fiction and none fiction. f) all classroom also have math and science manipulatives to support instruction and builds conceptual understanding of the content. ELLs with IEPs receive their mandated instruction in ENL by meeting with the ENL coordinator. All materials are in English as our program is Freestanding ENL Model. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL's with IEPs are serviced by the ENL coordinator by blending with general ed ELLs on the same grade level. In addition, we offer the services of the IEP pedagogue to these children one period per week. We also have ICT classes for grades K, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,8. Children are exposed to identical text and instructional material. The IEP and ENL coordinator provide instructional scaffolds and support to ensure that ENL and SWD access the curriculum. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We are targeting the entering and emerging group and enrichment is also provided for Expanding and Transitioning. All ELL's will be provided with 45 minutes of intervention that is built into their instructional day. PS111Q will also offer the following programs to all ELLs; a) after school program ( Monday, Wednesday and Friday) starting on October. b) dance program ( Tuesday, Thursday ) starting on October. e) Saturday Academy starting in January for 4 hours. f) during the school day intervention is provided in a small group by the classroom teacher, the content area specialist and the EIP teacher. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The school will be offering an after school Dance Club to enhance listening and speaking language modality.Research has provided evidence that students whose parents are involve in the school community will show more growth. The school will be offering targeted learning for parents in the use of micro soft world. Parent will also receive support in meeting and selected genres that are aligned to the current grade level of their children. The rational is to fully integrate the parents to the academic expectation of the students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students at community school 111Q, Jacob Blackwell are taught using identical curriculum; teacher college reading and writing, Go Math, Engage NY, Passport for social studies, National Geographic and Foss for science. Teachers strategically to 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 100  incorporate the use of measurable learning objectives, language objectives, multimedia and targeted small group to ensure greater opportunities for ELL's and SWE to access the curriculum. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The material we use are label text, manipulatives for math, all resources in Fundations for letter and sound recognition, Myon, and I-Ready. These resources are purposely integrated into daily instruction. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ICT, station teaching, and stand alone. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school partner with a consulting for Fordham University. The ENL Coordinator, The Consultant and the member of the team meet on a regular basis to update schedules as students are admitted, administrate the tests needed and analyze the results and to have parents meeting to ensure that all children are being served as required. We also use the EDAT information to align our instructional endeavors to students needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We share our building with a Charter school . The Charter school in an effort to align resources,had provided us with 25 laptop that are being use to support ELL's instruction. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parents orientation is offer every August call Sneak Peek. During the Sneak Peek the school psychologist, the parent coordinator, data specialist, IEP coordinator, ENL coordinator, teachers and teachers assistants, provide curriculum information to the parents. The Sneak Peek is also an opportunity to orient parents to the school community and built trust to the staff. As students enter our school during the school year, similar orientations are facilitated, by the team members. Parents receive the Family Handbook, Grading Policy, school calendar of professional, and students and parents events. The parents welcome the opportunity to learn about academic expectations, program offering and instructional resources. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 101  1. Professional development plan is scheduled on 4 week cycles that includes professional learning in all content and specialty areas. Professional development, at the school level, is provided on Mondays. There are also customized professional learning sessions offered weekly. All teachers receive professional learning on language acquisition, lesson planning, selecting resources, incorporating technology, etc. We also partner with Teacher College, Math solution and Goldmansour. The teachers receive content specific support in reading, writing and math. Goldmansour also provides support in ICT- parallel teaching and station teaching. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The schools meet all requirements by following all CR Part 154. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We keep all agendas and minutes on the Google doc. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We cater to our ELL parents during cultural celebrations, parent breakfasts, instructional support and family workshops that are scheduled by our Parent Coordinator and facilitated by all members of our staff. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 102 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dionne Jaggon, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 103  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Jacob Blackwell School DBN: 30Q111 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dionne A. Jaggon Title Principal Karen E. Guzman Assistant Principal Regine Joachim Parent Coordinator Carlos Fuentes ENL/Bilingual Teacher Millisia Taylor Parent Kristine Landberg Teacher/Subject Area Renny Usbay Teacher/Subject Area N/A Celeste Rivers Coach Coach MaryEllen Tsangalidis School Counselor Philip A. Composto Abbey Lewis Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member NA NA NA NA Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) NA NA NA 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 104 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Jacob Blackwell Superintendent: Dr. Composto DBN: 30Q111 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No ENL Coordinator/Teacher ENL Teacher Teacher Assistant Yes No No Yes Yes Yes (*Primary)Carlos Fuentes Li-yueh Husne Chen Ahmed * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents that speak languages other that English will have the opportunity to communicate their preferred language of communication upon entry with our School Safety Agent, (SSA). In the security's counter there are literature containing the different languages in which parents can communicate. In the main office there are also literature and posters that parents can read to select the language in which they want to be attended. Through a survey of our parents; all notices and communications will go out in English and other dominant languages. We determined from parent feedback and observation that we needed to translate all school parent notices into Spanish, and other languages for our ELL parents. As a result of observation we made of the number of parents who attended our school wide events and the verbal input form parents about their needs, we determined that 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 105  there was a need to have translators on site for all school parent training workshops, informational workshops, parent-teacher conferences, etc. A survey was sent home that assessed the needs of parents of English Language Learners for translation services. The School Report Card was analyzed to determine the ethnic groups of our school and languages spoken. Home Language Surveys were evaluated and student language and nation of origin determined and added to student biographical data on ATS. Student ethnicity report was generated from this data. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Chinese Spanish Urdu Arabic Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. The language that presents 10% or more of our families are English and Spanish. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families September translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The school calendar is translated Calendar 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 106  via our school website that translates the calendar and all "News" into all of our represented languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Orientation Ongoing at Registration interpretation service(s)? We have school staff that represents all spoken languages in our school. Scholar Led Conferences Parent Breakfasts Quarterly School staff will provide translation. Every other month School staff will provide translation. SLT Meetings Monthly School staff will provide translation. IEP Meetings Ongoing School staff will provide translation. Curriculum Night Annually School staff will provide translation. High School Articulation Three Times a Year School staff will provide translation. PTA Meetings Monthly School staff will provide translation. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 107  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We will immediately communicate with the Translation & Interpretation Unit for assistance. We also use an application called Kinvolved. Parents set Kinvolved to their desired language. School staff can message in English, parents receive message in their desired language, parents can also respond in their language and school staff will receive their message in English. Kinvolved is a two-way communication tool in which all parents can be reached simultaneously or select parents can be messaged. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. When requested our LAC will assist with training or meeting so he has the most accurate information in terms of goals,regulations, resources and everything related . We will schedule meetings in which this information can be shared with school staff. Each teacher also have a weekly Parent Empowerment meeting. During the meeting the parent coordinator share various structures that the school has to communicate with families in their desired language. The information is also shared in the Staff Handbook. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school will fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 in the following manner: -the above written translation procedure -the above oral translation procedure -the school will provide a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities to each school family -the school will post a sign, in various languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The mechanisms that our school will use to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services will be surveys and questionnaires at the face to face meetings. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 108 
