 29Q116 School Name: PS/IS 116 WILLIAM C. HUGHLEY Principal: DEBRA FARROW   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The William C. Hughley School 29Q116 School Number (DBN): 342900010116 Pre-K through 8 107-25 Wren Place Jamaica NY, 11433 718- 526-4884 Phone Number: 718- 658-5663 Fax: Debra Farrow Dfarrow@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Debra Farrow Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Danielle Thompson Denise Williamson Not signed in Not signed in Not signed inNot signed in MarisolMinueza VilmaJacinto Not signed in Not signed in Not signed inNot signed in N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 29 Beverly Mitchell Superintendent:   90-11 191st street Room 122 Hollis, NY 11423 Superintendent’s Office Address: bmitche2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-217-7740 718-217-7739 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd. MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-281-3259 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Debra Farrow Leah Cromer Denise Williamson VilmaJacinto N/A N/A Vacancy Nicole Davis ShellyannChediram *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Tanya Bentacourt NajmunNahar Sicilia Collins Anna Petrizzo Jessica Rodriguez Tatiana Walker Martha Andraca Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Para Member/ Teacher Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? School Vision & Mission Statement At the William C. Hughley School, we believe in providing a safe nurturing learning environment, where students benefit from an academically rigorous curriculum rich in the Arts, Science, and Social Studies as well as ELA and Math. On a daily basis students are presented with clear objectives for learning, rigorous tasks, and opportunities to engage   in accountable talk. We will build our students character by infusing service learning in our daily lessons and actions that teach them to solve real life problems. They will participate in school and community projects that are positive and meaningful. By laying a solid foundation across content areas and by infusing the Arts and character building into the curriculum, it is our goal to prepare every scholar at our school to enter and graduate from a four year college or university. We believe and are truly committed to the following: S tudent T eacher A cademic N urturing D edication A spiring R espect D evelopment S ocial 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The William C. Hughley school is a public school in Jamaica, New York. P.S./I.S 116Q is a combination elementary and middle school that houses students in grades pre-kindergarten through eight. The school is located geographically in New York City district 29. The school’s total population is 803 students, of which 395 (49%) are male and 408 (51%) are female. The school comprised of 53% Black or African American students (n = 425), 35% Latino or Hispanic students (n = 285), 6% Asian or Native Hawaiian/ other Pacific Islander (n = 47), 2% White or Caucasian (n = 16), 2% American Indian or Alaska Native (n =18), and 0.12% multiracial (n = 1). In addition 100% of students are eligible for free lunch. The William C. Hughley school’s middle school is called Liberty Academy. Liberty Academy houses grade 6-8 students. Liberty Academy Highlights: Liberty Academy is a middle school serving approximately 160 students. We are a small school that provides focused and individualized instruction to support our community of learners. We offer rigorous curricular that focuses on mathematics, English Language Arts, Science, Social Studies, Music and the arts. We have a strong emphasis on College and Career Readiness . All of our students understand the significance of obtaining a great education in preparation for college and/or careers in the future. In fact our 6th, 7th and 8th grade students are referred to as class of 2029, 2028, and 2027, respectively., as these years indicate the years in which they will graduate college. 0  Academic Programs/Offerings: Urban Advantage – Urban Advantage (UA) is a Middle School Science Initiative. UA is a standards-based collaboration between urban public school systems and science-rich cultural institutions including zoos, museums, botanical gardens, and science centers to improve students’ knowledge of science and engineering practices. UA students have opportunities to immerse themselves in scientific and engineering practices and explore why these practices are central to science and engineering. Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) - MSQI is a comprehensive program that focuses on strengthening literacy instruction in all middle school grades. MSQI’s goal is to establish successful models that result in significant progress in increasing the overall percentage of eighth grade students graduating reading on or above grade level, thereby ensuring that greater numbers of young adolescents are securely on the pathway to high school, college, and career success. The 5 MSQI Pillars include: · Reading, screening & monitoring · CCLS literacy across the content areas · Strategic reading tutoring & What I Need (WIN) Periods · Teacher teams · Continuous professional development Advisory- All of the middle school students are assigned to staff within the building to strengthen connectedness at the middle level between the students and staff. Advisors meet with a group of students to provide academic and social-emotional mentorship and support, to create personalization within the school, and to facilitate a small peer community of learners. Every child participates in small group strategic tutoring during & after the school day for either intervention or acceleration. Student groups receive targeted reading instruction that is carefully designed to expand and deepen reading skills. Ongoing reading assessments inform teachers on which group best meets students’ specific needs. Groups are flexible and change with students’ needs. While identified students are participating in strategic reading periods, lower performing and higher functioning students will engage in intervention and enrichment WIN instruction, respectively. These classes are designed to meet students where they are and to develop their individualized strengths. SASF: SASF’s mission is to help bridge the academic performance gap among under-achieving students by extending the school day and year with wholesome, skill-building activities designed to improve New York City children’s academic performance, health and wellness, attitude towards school, self-confidence, character and values, and opportunity for lifelong employment. Looking Forward: We will continue to find ways to build strong family and community ties as we understand that parental and community engagement positively impact student achievement. In addition we will focus on developing rigorous instruction for all students, building capacity within our school community, encouraging collaboration between our teachers, creating and nurturing a supportive environment and maintaining effective school leadership. 1  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The William C. Hughley school services many students who are in temporary housing. We also have a rapidly growing population of students With Disabilities (SWD) and English Language Learners (ELLs). Our students need many financial, social and emotional resources to combat many of their family/home situations. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Great School Framework: During the 2017-18 school year, our school focused on building strong family and community ties. We have established a warm and inviting environment in which parents feel comfortable and welcomed. We have also provided numerous professional Learning activities for parents. These need-specific workshops and professional learning opportunities helped parents support their children academically, socially, and emotionally. Professional learning sessions took place during the school day, afterschool, and on weekends in multiple forums. An action team comprised of administrators, staff, and parents was established to create opportunities for family involvement and securing a stronger school-family partnership. The William C. Hughley school also hosted various family nights: college readiness and Lincoln Center performance. In addition many family weekend trips were organized: Museum of Natural History, Hall of Science, Brooklyn Botanical Gardens, etc. During the 2018-2019 school year, our school will focus on rigorous instruction. Based on the ELA and Math State Exam, we recognize that the majority of our students are not proficient in both subjects. By professional development and curriculum planning, teachers will align their lessons to Common Core Standards as well as use research based innovative strategies in the classroom. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q116 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 792 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 97 96 22 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 52 34 22 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 78.0% % Attendance Rate 77.4% % Reduced Lunch 15.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.1% 35.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.06 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 24.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 58% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YES NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 70 69 8 90.8% 0.4% 22.3% 54.0% 6.8% 2.3% 4 18% 6.3 18.9% 34% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After reviewing data from 2017 NYC End of Year English Language Arts Writing Performance Tasks, 2015 NYS ELA item analysis, and student writing Samples, we have identified a need for a focus on writing within our community. Students in K-8 need to improve upon their writing. Data from 2017, NYC performance task reveal that 24.7 % of students in grades k-8 answered questions 50% or more of questions incorrectly on the 2016 End of Year NYC ELA performance task. Data from the 2015 NYS ELA assessment indicates that students at P.S./I.S. 116Q scored 10% lower than the New York City average on questions that required constructed response writing. Thus, it is imperative that we focus our efforts on improving our students' writing in all grades. Strengths: * Highly Qualified Teachers * Teacher Inquiry Teams/ Cycles of Inquiry * Data Analysis training & understanding * K-8 building * TC writing cohort * Writing Cluster Teacher Needs: * Resources * Professional Learning * Focus groups/targeted grouping Part 2 – Annual Goal 4  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an overall increase of 5% in Reading and Writing for students in grades K-8, measured by Developmental Reading Assessment (DRA) for Grades K-5 and Developmental of Reading Power (DRP) for Grades 6-8 5 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grade K-8 Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 (Ongoing) Administrators, Instructional team, Data team, Teacher leaders Grade K-8 Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Instructional team, Teacher Leaders, Data Team Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Learning: Professional Learning sessions will be provided to our teachers in order to enhance pedagogy, thereby increasing student achievement. Ongoing professional learning will also be provided to introduce new research-based strategies that support student needs and reinforce/strengthen best practices. Professional learning will be both needs-based, and support-based. Professional development will be provided based on the needs of our teachers (Danielson Data). Professional learning opportunities will also provide teachers with new innovate, researched-based strategies that will enhance instruction and ultimately student achievement. Curriculum and Instruction: Teachers will implement an array of best practices within the classroom. Teachers will use differentiated instructional strategies as well as Universal Design for Learning to address the varying needs and learning styles of their students. Teachers will implement the Depth of Knowledge (DOK) in creating rigorous tasks and designing higher order thinking questions. In addition, rubrics aligned to the common core standards will be used to assist the students with self-evaluating the learning outcomes. Teachers will align their Learning Outcomes based on the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers will implement the CCLS performance tasks from Ready Gen and Code X, Go MAth from Kindergarten through 8th grade. Teachers will also use Teachers College Writing Curriculum to enhance our students writing. Curricula Analysis will be an ongoing practice to ensure student achievement. Adjustment will be made based on student data, i.e. Kindergarten pilot of KinderLiteracy curriculum. (Kindergarten teachers identified a gaps in Ready Gen and researched CCLS aligned programs more suitable for their students. As a result, KinderLiteracy will be piloted this school. 6  Data will determine, whether we fully adopt this curriculum for other grades. ) Grade K-8 Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Teacher Leaders, Data Team, TLP graduates and Facilitators Teacher Collaboration, Reflection, Professionalism: Teacher teams will meet regularly to plan and review the Ready Gen and Code X and Go Math curriculum, research new instructional strategies to support learning and review student work. Daily common planning time will also provide teachers the opportunity to collaborate and carry out inter-class visitations. In addition, common assessments will be desgned during common planning time. Teachers will engage in inquiry work, analyzing the effectiveness of curricula resources, formative and summative assessments, pedagogy, and teaching practices. Adjustments will be based on student data. Ongoing evaluation/assessment of curricula resources assure that we are using and identifying the most effective resources and materials essential to increasing student achievement. Tier I RTI for students reading below grade level. All students reading below grade level will be identified using DRA data. Teachers/staff will use Tier I research-based reading strategies to students in reading at grade level. Progress monitoring will track and measure the effectiveness of strategies/best practices and the improvement of students. Grades K-8 students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Teacher Leaders, Data Team, RTI Coordinator, IEP teacher Additional academic support, for students in grade six through eight will be provided through the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) Grades 6-8 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation, Data Team, Saturday Academy: A Saturday program that offers additional academic support for students in grades three through eight. Instructional support will be provided in English Language Arts (ELA) and Mathematics. Students Grades 3-8 Students Dec. 2018 - April 2019 Administrators, Coach, Data Team, Instructional Team, Teacher Leaders, Teachers 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be offered monthly workshops to address various strategies in the classroom. There will be opportunities for parent participation in rigorous tasks at these workshops. Key personnel are administrators, parent coordinator, lead teachers and cluster teachers. Our monthly newsletter will include upcoming units of study and ways for parents to support their child at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a Title I School Wide Program (SWP) school, we use integrated services and programs with the aim of improving the entire educational program to help all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. We maximize fiscal resources by combining federal state and local funds (Tax Levy, Title I, Title III, NYSTL, etc.) to ensure we have funding for curricula resources, per session, and programs. Human resources include effective/highly effective teachers/staff committed to the success of our community of learners. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point Progress Monitoring date: By January 2019 there will be an overall increase of 3% in Reading for students in grades K-8, measured by the DRA and DRP. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Running records and the Winter DRP will be used to monitor progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Data from the schools 2014-2015 NYC Survey and Snapshot indicates that safety for our students is an area of concern. According to the NYC Survey and Snapshot, 90% of students feel safe in their classroom however, 72% of our students feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms and cafeteria. Recognizing this concern, we are putting structures in place to limit the number of infractions that happen in the common areas. Strengths: * Teachers are creating a safe environment within their classrooms * Teacher Team collaborates to create positive behavior incentives for students. * Teachers dedicate their own time to implement consequences for students when necessary. Needs: * Additional resources and personnel to monitor the hallways and bathroom. * Consistent SAVE room for students who violate the discipline code. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 9  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% decrease in OORS reports as measured by the Online Occurrence Reporting System and Suspensions and Office of Hearing Online (SOHO). 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Behavior Teacher Team meets bimonthly to look at the number of infractions using the Online Occurrence Reporting System. The data will be used to identify students who are having difficulty in common areas. Interventions are provided using research based strategies to develop structures that will help prevent further infractions. Positive Behavior Incentive and Supports are used as a proactive approach to creating a school culture that is safe and positive. The focus will be on modeling and reinforcing appropriate behaviors in common areas. Expectations is clearly communicated to all students and praise is given to students who are displaying good citizenship and monthly character traits. Strategies for redirecting negative behavior will be the focus instead of consequences for negative behavior. We will use Class Dojo school-wide as a way to highlight acceptable behaviors. All grades Sept. 2018 – June 2019 (Ongoing) All grades Sept. 2018 – June 2019 (Ongoing) Administrators, teachers, school safety, school aides, Sports and Arts in School Foundation Administrators, teachers, school aides, paraprofessionals, school safety, Sports and Arts in School Foundation Creation of a positive/supportive culture through Social and Emotional Literacy.All staff members and students will learn about social and emotional literacy. Professional learning will identify strategies staff members can use to be socially and emotionally aware and responsive. The mental health consultant will oversee collaboration and initiatives with agencies that prevent and educate students and their families dealing with mental health issues that affect student achievement. This partnership will assist with keeping issues from affecting emotional and academic development while improving academic performance and behavior in school. Student incentive programs will be implemented to improve student behavior. Bi-Monthly celebrations and awards ceremonies will be held for students who continuously show good character. We will use Class Dojo school-wide to acknowledge positive behaviors. All grades Sept. 2018- June 2019 (Ongoing) All staff members All grades Sept. 2018 – June 2019 (Ongoing) All grades Sept. 2018– June 2019 (Ongoing) Administrators, Mental Health Consultant, teachers, school aides, paraprofessional, school safety, Sports and Arts in School Foundation Administrators, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, school aides, paraprofessional, school safety, Sports 1  and Arts in School Foundation 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be exposed to monthly workshops regarding techniques to support their child at home. Class Dojo will be used to directly communicate with parents the expectations and keep open communication with all school staff. Key personnel are administrators, parent coordinator, lead teachers, cluster teachers and support staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Behavior teacher team, mental health consultant, school safety and partnerships with Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation; fundraisers will help raise money for monthly incentive programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 infractions in the cafeteria, hallway and bathroom for K-8 students will decrease by 5%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Online Occurrence Report System and periodic student surveys will be used to monitor how safe students feel in the hallway, cafeteria and bathrooms. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In Accordance with Race to the Top, an Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) was developed in order to evaluate teacher effectiveness. As this evaluation system is relatively new, it is comprised of new metrics and rubrics for evaluating teacher practices. The Danielson Framework is the rubric that was adopted to measure teacher practices. it is imperative that teachers receive the training and support they need in order to be successful in moving students. After continuous review of teacher effectiveness, review of teacher advance data from the 2016-2017 school year, and findings from professional learning needs assessment, it was determined that teachers could benefit from more professional learning. Our 2016-2017 Preliminary Overall teacher rating indicated that 97.8% of our teachers were Effective or Highly Effective teachers. In terms of Domain 3: Instruction, 93% of teachers displayed highly Effective or Effective teaching practices in 3B (using questioning & discussion techniques), 89% of teachers displayed highly effective teaching practices in 3C (Engaging Students in Learning), and 95% of teachers displayed teaching practices that were highly effective or effective. We would like to see all components of domain 3 at percentages at or above 90%. We understand that Professional learning opportunities will help improve teacher effectiveness thereby increasing student achievement. Strengths: * Highly Qualified Teachers * Comprehensive Curriculum aligned to Common Core, Instructional Shifts & Fluencies * Vast offering of Professional Learning Opportunities * Flexible Programming/scheduling * Instructional Coach * Teacher Leader Program (TLP) graduates and Facilitators Needs: * Resources, Materials, Technology * Time Management * Re-focused Teacher Team meetings 3  * Hard deadlines/due dates Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students with disabilities in least restrictive environment will increase by 5% as measured through progress monitoring (DRA/DRP, I-Ready, benchmark assessments) and SIT team. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will receive professional learning that pertains to Teacher Effectiveness and the Danielson Framework. Professional development sessions will deeply delve into the three components that encompass Domain three-Instruction of the Danielson Framework for Teacher Effectiveness. Sessions will provide information, best practices and various strategies for teachers to utilize in the classroom. Professional learning sessions will focus on: questioning and discussion techniques, engaging students in learning, and using assessments in instruction. Topics will include: engaging students in instruction, the use of assessments in instruction, using questioning and discussion techniques, UDL, designing lessons with multiple entry points, etc. )Professional learning sessions will be needs-based and differentiated for our teachers. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers and staff September 2018 – June 2019 (Ongoing) Administrators, teachers, Teacher Leaders, Specialists, Professional Learning Committee, TLP facilitator and participants 1 Teachers will engage in collaborative work through inter-visitations, team and grade meetings. Teachers will also engage in district Level collaboration with teachers from other schools in district 29. All teachers and staff Teachers will engage in teacher inquiry. Teacher Leadership Program participants and teacher leaders will facilitate inquiry work. Teachers will look at student work samples and analyze data in an effort to move teacher practice, thereby increasing student achievement. All teachers and staff September 2018 – June 2019 (Ongoing) September 2018 – June 2019 (Ongoing) Administrators, teachers, Teacher Leaders, Specialists, Professional Learning Committee, TLP facilitator and participants Administrators, teachers, Teacher Leaders, Specialists, Professional Learning Committee, TLP facilitator and participants Common preps are provided for teachers to discuss best practices, trends and looking at student work. Teachers collaborate on Unit Plans and Common Assessments to increase student achievement. Teachers will analyze curricula resources, All teachers and staff September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, teachers, Teacher Leaders, Specialists, Professional 5  assessment data, strategies to measure effectiveness. Adjustments will be made based on data. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement (Ongoing) Learning Committee, TLP facilitator and participants How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly newsletters will also be used to communicate strategies for parents to implement with their child. Workshops will be provided to assist parents with how to use I-Ready at home to assist students with academic success. Key personnel are administrators, parent coordinator, teachers and cluster teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common planning periods will be used for teachers to discuss and assess the implementation of the strategies and practices during professional planning, grade meetings, and weekly teacher team meetings. Administrators will meet with teachers and staff to assess implementation and impact of strategies, best practices and resources provided. Teacher leadership partnership will serve as a resource for TLP participants. The master program is designed to facilitate common preps for each grade. Adjustments to the daily program will be necessary in order to facilitate inter-visitations. Monday and Tuesday afternoons will also be used to facilitate this work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, SWD will show 2.5% increase in academic progress as monitored by mid-year assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. I-Ready, DRA, DRP and mid-year assessments will be used to monitor progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School improvement is complex and challenging; it can’t be done without participation from all key stakeholders/members of the school community. For the past few years, student attendance has been a problem of concern. The primary function of school is to educate children, however they need to be present in order to do so. School leadership has charged members of the school community with the shared-responsibility of improving student attendance percentages. In doing so, an action team of student, teacher and community leaders will be formed, whose mission will be to create/implement structures and activities aimed at remedying our attendance problem. During the 2016-2017 school year our attendance rate was 92.86, which revealed a 1.34% increase from the 2015-2016 school year. We invested a great deal of time, energy and resources in order to make this growth. We will continue to work diligently toward this goal, as we understand that we still have progress to make. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, there will be a 2% increase in attendance rates as measured by the school’s annual attendance report. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Attendance Team: The attendance team will meet and analyze attendance data monthly. Daily and monthly reports will be analyzed to identify attendance trends (Latenesses and absences). Pre- K-8 grade Students September 2018– June 2019 (Ongoing Correction & Recognition: Names of students will be posted daily, for possible corrections to be made. Weekly announcements will be made identifying grades and classes with perfect attendance for the week; monthly announcements will identify students and classes with perfect attendance for the month. Students in grades Pre-K through 8. September 2018 – June 2019 (Ongoing) Student Incentives: Student incentive programs will be implemented to improve student attendance, i.e. Never Been Absent (NBA) list. Bi-monthly celebrations and award ceremonies will be held to recognize students with improved attendance percentages. Parents will receive a monthly calendar of activities. Students in grades Pre-K - 8 September 2018 – June 2019 (Ongoing) Parent Incentives: Parent incentive programs will be created to encourage parents to bring their children to school daily. i.e. coupons for clothing stores, grocery stores/supermarkets, etc. Also, parents whose children have perfect attendance for a given month will be invited to (monthly) parent networking/celebratory tea parties. Students in grades Pre-K - 8 September 2018 - June 2019 (Ongoing) Attendance Team, Administrators, Teachers, Secretaries, Family Workers, Attendance Teacher, Nurse, Parent Teacher Association (PTA), Parents, Parent Coordinator Attendance Team, Administrators, Teachers, Secretaries, Family Workers, Attendance Teacher, Nurse, Parent Teacher Association (PTA), Parents, Parent Coordinator Attendance Team, Administrators, Teachers, Secretaries, Family Workers, Attendance Teacher, Nurse, Parent Teacher Association (PTA), Parents, Parent Coordinator Attendance Team, Administrators, Teachers, Secretaries, Family Workers, Attendance Teacher, Nurse, Parent Teacher Association 8  3b – Parent and Family Engagement (PTA), Parents, Parent Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families are invited on a monthly basis to a breakfast with administration. During the breakfast, an open forum is created to encourage communication between the parents and administration. Parents are encouraged to join learning leaders in order to assist teachers in the classroom. Key personnel are administrators and parent coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Partnerships with local and city-wide vendors/merchants will help raise funds for monthly incentive programs. We also utilize every human resource possible. Teachers and staff are all committed to the success of our community of learners, therefore they engage in activities (before, during and after school) that lead to an increase positive student outcomes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be a 1% increase in attendance rates as measured by the school’s annual attendance report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance data percentages. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Research shows that parent engagement is linked to positive student outcomes, namely academic achievement, attendance and attitudes toward schools. Chancellor Carmen Farina also recognizes the importance of parent engagement, as she as incorporated it into her Framework for Great Schools. Less than 10% of our parents/guardians are in attendance at school activities/events. It is crucial that we make an engage our parents in the schooling of their children. Strengths: * Parent Coordinator communicates regularly with parents on the Parent Teacher Association. * Parent workshops are provided on a monthly basis to service the needs of the parents * Lincoln Center Program connects the school with the community by bringing the arts into the school building. Needs: * Resources/materials * Funding Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in Math proficiency as measured by the State Test. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Workshops: Needs-based workshops will be provided to parents. workshops will help parents support their children, academically, socially and emotionally. Workshops will take place during and after-school, and also on the weekend. Workshops will also be multiple forums. All P.S./I.S. 116Q Parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 (Ongoing) Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, PTA/ Parent Leaders Parent-Engagement Team: Teacher team, whose focus is on engaging parents by providing them with strategies and best practices that they can use when helping their children with school-work at home. Knowing and understanding how to use various strategies and best practices will empower parents, allowing them to become active participants in their children's education. Parents of P.S./I.S. 116Q Sept. 2018- June 2019 (Ongoing) Administrators, Committee, Parent Coordinator, Instructional Coach, Teachers, PTA/ Parent Leaders Parent Coordinator: The Parent Coordinators acts as a liaison between parents and the school. The Parent Coordinator communicates important information to parents regarding academics, services, housing, etc. Coordinates activities for parent workshops and family weekend learning activities. Parents of P.S./I.S. 116Q Sept. 2018- June 2019 (Ongoing) Administrators, Parent Engagement Committee, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, PTA/ Parent Leaders Teacher Professional Learning: Professional Learning will be provided to teachers to effectively communicate strategies families can implement at home with their children. Parents may Parents of P.S./I.S. 116Q Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Parent Engagement Committee, Parent 1 be eager to assist their children but need support from teachers in order to do so. Professional learning sessions will equip teachers with techniques that provide parents with needed support. (Ongoing) Coordinator, Teachers, PTA/ Parent Leaders School- Family-Community Engagement: The school will partner with community organizations, thereby linking families to additional resources. Community partnerships will be based on the needs of our students and families. (i.e. our Lincoln Center Education Partnership will expose our families to the various forms of Art). School and Parent leaders will work collaboratively to identify the needs of the school community, develop and nurture community partnerships, and measure the effectiveness of partnerships. The entire school community. Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Parent Engagement Committee, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, PTA/ Parent Leaders, SLT members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parents will be provided with workshops on what to their children should know by the end of the grade. Parents will also be invited to their childs classroom on a monthly basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We maximize fiscal resources by combining federal state and local funds, such as Tax Levy, Title I, Title III, NYSTL, and other resources to implement activities and programs to reach our goal. We also utilize every human resource possible. Our Parent Engagement committee, and Parent Coordinator will also be leveraged in order to reach our goal. Daily programming adjustments will be necessary to allow teachers and staff members to present to parents during the school day. Tuesday Parent Engagement time will also be maximized, by facilitating meaningful, needs-based PD to our families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be a 2.5% increase in student proficiency as measured by mid year assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2  Assessments will come from the mid year check in via Go Math and I-Ready. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group and one to one Instruction is provided. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Service is provided during the school day, after school and weekend hours Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students are identified using data from summative, formative, and secondary assessments, as well as data from state and local assessments. Students scoring in the lowest third percentile will be identified to receive AIS services. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) The AIS department at PS116 provides small group instruction to students functioning below grade level. Differentiated instruction is given to reinforce phonemic awareness and comprehension skills. AIS services are administered during the regular academic day, Extended Day, as well as during Supplemental Education Services which is provided as an afterschool program. AIS instruction for grades K through 4 includes introduction to and reinforcement of: letter/sound recognition, word families, rhyming words, segmenting, initial and ending sounds, sight words, decoding, and writing. Analysis of running record results aid in the determination of a 4  Mathematics Science students’ required course of action. Grades 5 - 8 AIS instruction includes using visual, auditory, and kinesthetic modalities to teach reading strategies. These strategies reinforce the concepts of finding the main idea, identifying supporting details, comparing and contrasting, using context clues, making inferences, sequencing, and writing. The AIS department at PS116 provides small group instruction to students functioning below grade level. Differentiated instruction is given to reinforce mathematics skills. AIS services are administered during the regular academic day, as well as extended day. The AIS department at PS116 provides small group instruction to students functioning below grade level. Differentiated instruction is given to reinforce comprehension skills in the content area. AIS services are administered during the regular academic day, as well as during Extended Day. In Students are identified using data from summative, formative, and secondary assessments, as well as data from state and local assessments. Students scoring in the lowest third percentile will be identified to receive AIS services. Students are identified using data from summative, formative, and secondary assessments, as well as data from state and local assessments. Students scoring in the lowest third percentile will be identified to receive AIS services. Small group and one to one Instruction is provided. Service is provided during the school day, after school and weekend hours. Small group and one to one Instruction is provided . Service is provided during the school day and after school. 5  Social Studies Students are identified using data from summative, formative, and secondary assessments, as well as data from state and local assessments. Students scoring in the lowest third percentile will be identified to receive AIS services. addition, we have teamed up with the New York Hall of Science and Learning Gardens. Through these partnerships, students are exposed to hands-on scientific discovery. AIS instruction includes using visual, auditory, and kinesthetic modalities to teach reading strategies. These strategies reinforce the concepts of finding the main idea, identifying supporting details, comparing and contrasting, using context clues, making inferences, sequencing, and writing. The AIS department at PS116 provides small group instruction to students functioning below grade level. Differentiated instruction is given to reinforce comprehension skills in the content area. AIS services are administered during the regular academic day, as well as Extended Day. AIS instruction includes using visual, auditory, and kinesthetic modalities to teach reading strategies. These strategies reinforce the concepts of finding the main idea, identifying supporting details, comparing Small group and one to one Instruction is provided. Service is provided during the school day. 6 Small group and one to one Instruction is provided. Service is provided during the school day. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students are identified using data from OORS, at-risk counseling records, School Implementation Team (SIT), and the School Based-Support Team. Students may also be identified by teachers and staff members. Students identified by the aforementioned individuals, data, and teams will become the targeted group to receive At-risk services. and contrasting, using context clues, making inferences, sequencing, and writing. As a counseling service we provide strategies that help students to adjust and conform to the learning environment. On a daily basis during the regular school day we provide very concrete games and activities to assist the student with making a decision and accepting responsibility. In addition, support teams made up of guidance counselors, social workers, school psychologists, SAPIS Workers and all other pedagogues assigned, are responsible for addressing the social, emotional and personal needs of the student that prevents the student from learning. Counseling: individual and group counseling, these services include at-risk and mandated students. The average population of students serviced during this school year, were approximately 25. In addition to the at-risk services provided, teacher collaboration is utilized to assist teachers during crisis/emergency 7  situations. Also, work with parents to understand student emotional/ academic functions. As a school psychologist, my work consists of doing cycle educational evaluations, educational planning conferences, and managing cases. Generally on a 1:1 basis, but occasionally small group counseling, for up to approximately 6 sessions, with students who are at risk of needing special education services or of requiring a more restrictive environment. Secondly, we meet with the parents of specific at-risk students to clarify issues, gather initial social history, provide information, referrals, and to discuss ways they can increase the chances of their children succeeding in school. Thirdly, observation of at-risk students. Lastly, consultation with teachers and other staff, concerning at-risk students. All services take place during the school day. Provide services daily to approximately 15 students during regular school hours. Mandated services 8  are provided to one student daily with ADHD, two students who do not have 504s for school year 2010/2011diagnosed with asthma or are not being properly medically managed. 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently we have 30 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide clothing for uniform and supplies for school (books, pencils, pen, etc.). Homework help will be provided during school hours for the students who need it. Assistance will be provided for students medical needs such as eyeglasses, dental and asthma by referring parents to low cost or free agencies. Transportation will be provided for students to and from school. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Prior to hiring a candidate, their credentials are verified by our Network’s HR Director to ensure that the candidate holds valid NYS certification in that license area. The BEDS survey is reviewed periodically by the principal and the Human Resources director who works with our school to ensure that every teacher’s assignment aligns with their license area so that all teachers are reported as Highly Qualified on the BEDS Survey. Strategies and activities used to attract highly qualified teachers to our school include: · Frequent communication with our Network Human Resources Director when vacancies occur. · The Network Human Resources Director partners with Central for assistance and guidance and for candidate referrals. The Central Office of Talent and Recruitment partners with colleges to locate highly qualified candidates. · Our school participates in Central Hiring Fairs where pre-screened HQT candidates are interviewed and recruited. · Our school established a partnership with St. Johns University, Adelphi University, Queens College , and York College to support the grooming of student teachers in the search of HQT candidates. · Our school engages in interviews with HQT candidates from The Open Market Hiring System and The Absent Teacher Reserve (ATR) Pool. · Our school establishes a rigorous interview protocol that includes intensive criteria for the selection of new staff members including demonstration lessons, interviews, and a review of New York State certification/licensing. · Our school maintains a professional library to promote promising and effective practices. · Our school provides teachers with curriculum maps, instructional resources and professional learning opportunities designed to ensure high quality instruction. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). High quality professional development is defined by several interactive factors. It implies rich content that is specifically chosen to deepen and broaden the knowledge and skills of teachers, administrators, paraprofessionals, and other key educational staff members. Our high-quality professional development is based on substantive well-defined objectives, structure, reflecting, well-thought out delivery, need, efficient use of time, varied and effective styles of pedagogy, discourse and application , and the use of formative and summative assessments. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The Pre-kindergarten teachers use a thematic based curriculum, which they align with the Pre-Kindergarten Common Core Learning Standards. The curriculum is differentiated in order to meet the needs of all students; various access points exist for ELL students, Students with Disabilities, etc. Pre-Kindergarten teachers participate in school wide professional development in addition to pre-kindergarten professional development offered by New York City. There is a huge emphasis on transitioning pre-kindergarten students and their parents. Students experience the “Day-and-Life” of a kindergartener. They visit and explore kindergarten classrooms, have breakfast and lunch in the cafeteria, participate in story time and a variety of learning activities. Parents are given the opportunities to attend workshops: what to expect in kindergarten, how to transition your pre-k child into kindergarten, etc. Parents are also provided with resource material ensuring a smooth transition. Baseline data is provided to kindergarten teachers through vertical articulation with pre-kindergarten teachers. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 3  Teachers work collaboratively to create common assessments. Teachers create, select and reflect upon assessments during their common prep time, grade-level meetings, and teacher team meetings. Teachers are encouraged to evaluate and reevaluate assessments as needed. Teachers’ feedback is used by administration to guide the purchasing of materials, as well as scheduling of assessments. Teachers engage in ongoing professional development surrounding assessments; how to administer assessments (DRA, Writing on Demand, etc.), creating effective formative and summative assessments, using assessments to drive instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 357,149.00 119,644.00 11,200.00 0 4,029,326.00 X X X n/a X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D 5A, 5C, 5E n/a 5A,5B, 5C,5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 4  which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. The William C. Hughley School’s Parent Involvement Policy Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The William C. Hughley School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The William C. Hughley School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 6  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 7  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. ● The William C. Hughley School’s Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) The William C. Hughley School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and 8  programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 9  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 0  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 2 2 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The rationale of the Title III Program at PS/IS 116 is to identify the ELLs in need of additional academic support, identify the specific area and extent of need and provide support. Determination of academic need is based on the NYSESLAT scores, baseline assessments, DRA and previous year's Math and ELA scores.The subgroups and grade levels of students to be served is as follows, - students whose home languages are Bengali, English, Creole, Spanish, Urdu, etc., and ELLs with special needs. The grade levels are K through 8th. The program instructors are two certified ENL teachers, and the language of instruction is English. The 2017-2018 Title lll program consists of Direct Instruction Supplemental Program and "Imagine Learning" computer program. It is scheduled for after-school and takes place twice a week, Wednesdays and Thursdays, 1 1/2 hours per day. The program began in October and ended on May 31st. The two certified ENL teachers serviced 32 students. Program notification letters were sent out in English, Spanish, Urdu ,Bengali and Haitian Creole. These letters are translated by bilingual school staff. Should we need these letters in another language, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation unit for support. Program attendance was maintained by the two ENL teachers. Attendance is also maintained through the Office of School Food and Nutrition, as we receive free snack for the students. The "Imagine Learning" computer program has native language support in 8 languages, while guiding students toward English proficiency. It also uses modeled instruction, guided practice and immediate feedback to each student during usage. "Imagine Learning" focuses on phonemic awareness, vocabulary, conversation, letter recognition, and story comprehension. Students are also encouraged to record their voices and compare their speech to the modeled responses. The "Imagine Learning" program includes concepts such as the alphabet sound/symbol correspondence and sight word recognition, while developing vocabulary and literacy skills. "Imagine Learning" teaches everyday English skills, as students listen, interact, and learn from characters in real-life situations. Parallel to "Imagine Learning", students received direct academic support in content areas based on individual need. This need was determined based on various assessments by the content area teacher. Materials used were "Reach" textbooks and other resources that help achieve progress. The rationale for selecting the students is to provide support in areas of various deficiencies: For maximum effectiveness, the students are grouped based on certain criteria: Subgroup 1 is newly arrived middle and upper elementary school ELLs who need social and academic language development. Subgroup 2 is lower elementary students who need instruction in vocabulary development, reading and writing. 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information As one teacher is instructing one group in an adjacent room, the other is overseeing the remaining students in the computer lab. After about 45 minutes, the groups rotate. The first group begins with "Imagine Learning" and the second group receives direct instruction for about 45 minutes. The teachers have created a rotating schedule to ensure that each group receives both direct and computer instructions. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The rationale of this section is to provide all teachers of ELLs with proper support and appropriate tools to provide the best possible instruction to the ELLs towards English proficiency and academic success. To achieve that goal, the teachers of ELLs attend professional development provided by the school, the Queens South Field Support Center, or any other high quality Professional Development aimed at equipping teachers of ELLs with highly researched and proven strategies that work. The three certified ENL teachers at PS/IS 116 attend ongoing PDs provided by the Queens South FSC-ELL team. They turnkey the information by conducting workshops and provide support and information to enhance the delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. The audience is PS/IS 116 teachers and educational assistants who work with ELLs. The list and tentative schedule of the workshops is listed below. October- "The Five Levels of Language Proficiency and What Teachers can Expect from ELLs at each level" December - "How to Select and Write Language and Content Objectives" February - "Various Scaffolding for Various Needs" March - "Supporting Vocabulary Development in Content Areas" Each workshop may last 45-60 minutes, followed by a Q&A session, to take place during Monday PD time. The agendas and attendance sheets will be maintained by the ENL coordinator and the main office. The ENL teachers' ongoing professional development and the following turnkey meetings ensure that the entire school staff are up to date with new educational strategies, as well as the policies of CR Part 154 and CR Part 200. The Principal provides support to the teachers in all areas of the Common Core Learning Standards, which includes support for ELLs and students with disabilities. The school PD committee also plans workshops that help teachers meet the various needs of the ELLs. This has also helped the ENL teachers align their work with State and City expectations. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 5  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: The PS/IS 116 Parent Coordinator conducts several monthly parent workshops that address many of the parents' needs in supporting their children's academic and social development. Every workshop has translation services provided to ensure that all parents are informed of any new policies and programs that are available and/or affect their children. All school wide notices are translated into other languages before distribution. The monthly calendar that goes home with every student lists all the meetings, workshops and activities planned for that month. Several staff members are bilingual which include Educational Assistants, School Psychologist and Social Worker who assist when translation/interpretation is needed during meetings, workshops and various activities. If we do not have any school members who can translate during these workshops, the Parent Coordinator will call the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit for assistance. Some of the workshops are: * Parent Coordinator helps conduct the Cornell Parenting and Nutrition workshops, which are conducted every Tuesday. * Hispanic Heritage Month Celebration and Parent Luncheon in October. * Multicultural Feast -November . * High School Articulation- conducted in October by the guidance counselor. * Parent info for DRA Literacy- provided by the administration of 29Q116. * Response to Intervention- provided by the SETSS teacher . * A trip to Ellis Island and Statue of Liberty - June 2nd. * Parent Engagement Workshop " Fun in the City" on summer activities and resources for ELLs - June 19th. We also conducted an informative workshop for the parents of the after-school program participants. A representative from the "Imagine Learning" program had an interactive workshop and explained to the parents the different facets of "Imagine Learning" and how it is helpful for their children. Parents were able to use the program and see the actual work that their child is doing. A second workshop presented by the after school teachers shared the academic progress the students made with the parents. Translators were provided during these workshops from in-house staff or from the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. All agendas, invitations and attendance sheets are maintained by the Parent Coordinator in a special binder that is kept in the main office. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 6 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name William C. Hughley Borough Queens School Number 116 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Debra Farrow Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher T. Daleo-Doussi, M.Casaceli, Teacher/Subject Area J.Rhuma, Speech Teacher/Subject Area M. Patton/SETTS Related-Service Provider C. Adams Superintendent Beverly Mitchell Assistant Principal Isannah Winley Coach N/A School Counselor Renois, Jackson Parent To be completed Parent Coordinator Farida Mooklal Field Support Center Staff Member Marie Antoinette Rousseau Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 729 8 Total number of ELLs 125 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.15%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) N/A K 1 2 Lang. N/A 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 4 0 3 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At PS/IS 116, we assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs in September/October by administering the DRA which measures the students' levels in fluency, decoding and comprehension. The DRA is administered again in January and May. In addition, the Baseline Assessment Test, developed by our school for gr. 3-8, measures the students' levels in reading comprehension. PS/IS 116 uses Ready Gen for literacy and that program has assessments built in after each unit. For writing, we use Teachers' College, which also has pre-imposed writing assessments. As an informal and ongoing assessment, one of the school's foci is "Check for Understanding" as an essential part of each lesson. Combined with the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, ELL Periodic Assessments and Spanish Lab-R results, all of the data together gives us insight into the individual academic needs of each ELL; whether they have had any prior schooling and have strong L1 foundation or have no educational foundation in L1, therefore making the acquisition of L2 more challenging and requiring a different instructional approach. Based on the data from all of the above assessments, an instructional plan is devised to set and meet the goals for each ELL's progress towards proficiency. 9  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To support the effort of identifying the ELLs' and all other students' specific academic needs and planning to meet those needs, the administration at PS/IS 116 has scheduled each grade with common preps. This scheduling allows each grade, along with ENL teachers and other service providers, to meet at least once a week for common planning and discussion of student progress, specific issues and how to accommodate students to overcome those issues. The school also has teacher teams that meet twice monthly on Mondays in order to examine student work focusing on one specific academic area at a time. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In addition to the above-mentioned assessments, PS/IS 116 has been administering the ELL Periodic assessment twice yearly for the last several years. Results are compared to measure progress and to identify areas that need focused instruction with additional scaffolding. The results are also measured against other assessments to see correlation and additional clarification of the data. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Whenever possible, the ELLs are grouped homogeneously. This allows for whole group instruction that addresses and meets the needs of that specific group. When groups are heterogeneous, the students are grouped based on their language proficiency level and instruction is differentiated for each group based on their language proficiency level. The Title III after school program uses Imagine Learning which can be customized based on home language and proficiency level. There is also small group instruction by ENL certified teachers who provide individual instruction to struggling ELLs. Another after school program is Sports and Arts. Many ELLs participating in this program receive help with their homework. The parent coordinator plans several workshops throughout the year that focus on equipping parents with tools to help their children academically. The ELL parents attend these workshops where there is also an interpreter. The school has structures in place on many levels to help all ELLs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 116 William C. Hughley School is committed to equipping all students with the tools they need for academic, personal and social achievement. We enable every student to reach their highest potential by establishing a curriculum that meets or exceeds government standards for education. Therefore this Response to Intervention (RTI) plan has been designed to increase the academic success rate of all students by assessing teacher concerns about student academic and behavioral difficulties, universally screening all students in literacy, analyzing student data, designing specific intervention plans, progress monitoring, and communicating plans and results with students’ parents. English Language Learners that are at-risk fall into 116’s RTI system. Tier I In Tier 1, all students are screened. Students in grades K-8 are screened in Fall, Winter and Spring using DRA 2. Students in grade 6 are screened in the fall using the DRP test. Running records will be used for ongoing progress monitoring between benchmark screenings. Teachers will analyze the data and plan standards based best practices. Core instruction in grades K -8 is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards via School Based Literacy curriculum maps, and components of the 0  ReadyGen Reading Program. The classroom teachers implement Tier 1 interventions through differentiated instruction. Student progress is closely monitored by classroom assessments, unit test, and culminating unit tasks. The grade level Inquiry Teams meet to discuss the progress of all students and if progress monitoring indicates a need for more intense interventions, the Grade Level Inquiry Teams meet to discuss options for Tier 2 interventions. Students and parents are made aware of student progress via progress reports, and notification letters upon entering each tier of intervention. Grade Level Inquiry Team meetings are focused on reviewing student assessment data and class work. The team reviews screening and common assessment results and identify students who are in need of interventions. Teachers decide on Tier 1 differentiation and assessments. Tier 1 instructional strategies are recorded. Tier 2 We employ Tier 2 interventions that are designed to provide supplemental, focused teaching and learning opportunities for a small group of students who are not responding to Tier 1 instruction and interventions. Students who receive Tier 2 interventions also continue to receive Tier 1 instruction and intervention. The interventions are designed to remediate students’ basic academic skills. Tier 2 interventions take place during the instructional day during the literacy block and also during extended day. Fundations, Thinking Maps, Wilson, and ReadyGen and GoMath are some of the interventions that will be used. The duration of Tier 2 interventions are based on student data. Students in the 6th grade are tested during this phase using the WIST. There are then pulled of Wilson Just Words intervention 3 times a week. The RTI team develops instructional strategies that all service providers will implement. Progress monitoring is ongoing throughout Tier 2 and parents are made aware of student progress through written correspondence. All students identified in Tier 2 receive high quality interventions that are provided by classroom teachers and service providers who have met with Grade Level Teams and the RTI team to develop an intervention plan that addresses the learning needs of each student Benchmarked assessments that are skill specific are administered frequently during Tier 2 and data is analyzed to determine the need for additional intervention or a change of intervention. The RTI Team and Grade Level Inquiry Teams meet weekly to develop effective Tier 2 plans and review progress monitoring tools. Tier III The Tier 3 interventions provide more individualized, intense teaching and learning opportunities for students who are not achieving grade level expectations. More intensive interventions are achieved with a smaller student-teacher ratio, a longer duration of instructions, detailed attention to individual learning styles and the social environment, and more frequent progress monitoring. As in Tier 2, students who receive Tier 3 interventions continue to receive core instruction. Tier 3 instruction occurs during the daily literacy block. These interventions include intense Fundations, ReadyGen, Rigby and Wilson. Furthermore, many students receiving Tier 3 interventions will continue to require support in all three tiers in order to accelerate progress by the end of the intervention period. Students also receive 1:1 reading instruction provided by Experience Corps. Many English Language Learners in grades k-3, and 6 receive RTI services through Experience Corps. The RTI Team and service providers develop instructional strategies that all service providers implement. Progress monitoring is ongoing. If a student does not show adequate progress the team carefully examines why the student is making little or no progress, it is important for the RTI team to review the effectiveness of previous interventions to determine if a different intervention would benefit the learner. Based on these considerations, the RTI team determines whether a referral is necessary. Parents are made aware of student progress. All students identified in Tier 3 receive high quality Tier 3 interventions that are provided by teachers and service providers who involve various support personnel assistance related to diagnosis, research-based strategies, and cognitive processing to help revise the individual learning plan. The RTI meets monthly and sometimes bi-weekly to develop effective Tier 3 plans and review progress monitoring. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our school uses the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, ELA, Math and ELL Periodic Assessments to evaluate and inform our ELL program.The NYSESLAT , NYSITELL and ELL Periodic Assessments show us the student's levels in the domains of listening, speaking, reading and writing.We are then able to form groups and direct instruction in ways that will best suit our ELLs.We also take into account their years of service, sife status, and IEP's. The ELA and Math City- Wides help us to evaluate their how they are faring in the classroom and how we can support the classroom teacher in attaining higher levels of instruction. 1  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our ENL teachers create data sheets, using the ELL Data Analysis Tool, that they share with each other and staff. These data sheets are shared during grade meetings, school PD's and during meetings with administration. Our administration asks for these data sheets and makes sure that they are discussed in a meaningful way. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELLs in general education classes of all levels of the same grade are placed in one class. The ENL teacher pushes in to provide integrated services to all ELLs of every proficiency level for 180 minutes per week. The ENL teacher pulls out the Entering and Emerging students from that class to provide them with additional 180 minutes of free-standing ENL, making it 360 minutes. The free-standing classes are homogeneous. ELLs with IEPs in ICT and self-contained Special Education classes are grouped together with three consecutive grades and provided with 180 minutes of integrated and 180 minutes of free-standing ENL services for Entering and Emerging students, totaling in 360 minutes. There are two groups of IEP students The integrated groups are heterogeneous, the free-standing groups are homogeneous. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our school wide schedule allows for double period literacy blocks every day, making it easier for the ENL teacher to be able to spend two consecutive periods of integrated ENL in the classroom. If pushing in, the support staff ensures that they are with the students during the literacy block. If pulling out, the staff makes sure to cover the same curriculum with necessary scaffolding and sheltered instruction. It is essential for the ENL teachers and other support staff to be informed of the content being taught in the classroom, therefore the ENL teachers regularly meet or communicate with the content area teachers and coordinate instruction with them. The ENL teacher pushes in to provide integrated services to all ELLs of every proficiency level for 180 minutes per week. The ENL teacher pulls out the Entering and Emerging students from that class to provide them with additional 180 minutes of free-standing ENL, making it 360 minutes. The free-standing classes are homogeneous. ELLs with IEPs in ICT and self-contained Special Education classes are grouped together with three consecutive grades and provided with 180 minutes of integrated and 180 minutes of free-standing ENL services for Entering and Emerging students, totaling in 360 minutes. There are two groups of IEP students The integrated groups are heterogeneous, the free-standing groups are homogeneous. 2  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teachers in our school work with classroom teachers to help support ELLs with content area class work. During our pull-out periods of instruction, content area work in English is taught by differentiated instruction. Some of the approaches used are: * Modeling explicitly by giving clear examples of what is requested of them for imitation. * Scaffolding- providing necessary support in vocabulary to ensure content comprehension. * Sheltered English using the SIOP model. *Bridging- an approach of learning new concepts and language by firmly building them on the students previous knowledge and understanding. *Contextualization- using manipulatives, pictures, film (w/o sound) and other resources to engage the students. *Schema Building- clusters of meaning that are interconnected will help with their understanding of new concepts. *Text Re-Presentation- engaging the students in activities that require them to change linguistic constructions they found modeled in one genre into forms used in another genre. * Native language support by providing them with glossaries and literature in their home language. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As per state law, Spanish-speaking new students are evaluated not only by NYSITELL, but also by Spanish Lab-R to assess their proficiency in their native language. For standardized tests, the school's testing coordinator makes sure to order content area tests in their native language, if available. If not, the students are given glossaries downloaded from the state's website or bilingual concise dictionaries. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Lessons for the ELLs are planned around the four modalities. Each lesson contains instruction/component in listening, speaking, reading and writing. Throughout the lesson and in the culminating task the student is being monitored for progress and informally assessed in each modality. Another form of assessment is conferencing with the ELLs on regular basis and recording it (once-twice weekly). As a formal assessment, the NYC ELL Periodic Assessment is used in November and March of every year for grades 3-8 in all modalities. Detailed results are available online and are analyzed by the ENL teachers and used to guide future instruction. Hampton-Brown's Avenues has a formal assessment tool for grades K-8, and we use that at the beginning of the year as a baseline, then administer again the mid-year and end-of-year assessments to track progress. Further formal and informal assessments include end- of- lesson and unit assessments. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies used to provide access to academic content areas and to accelerate English language development are various vocabulary comprehension tools mentioned above, building on prior knowledge, technology and native-language support in order to build new knowledge. In addition, Entering and Emerging ELLs receive phonics and grammar 3  instruction to enhance their reading comprehension. Materials used are Reach by National Geographic, a Phonics Program, and curricular materials used by the school. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL and Special Education teachers work closely to plan strategies to help ELL-SWDs achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. These teachers share their respective data with each other at the beginning of the year, discuss the students' IEPs and plan on ways to address each student's needs. They also work on scheduling ENL services so that they maximize the benefits of each service they receive. The teachers plan collaboratively each week in order to coordinate instruction that covers the curriculum. In 2017-2018 academic year, one of the Teacher Inquiry Teams is a team of ELL and Special Education teachers who inquire about best practices for ELL-SWDs and look at the latest research into best practices in achieving academic success for ELL-SWDs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At the beginning of each school year, teachers of ELLs look at the data from NYSESLAT, ELA, Math and Science standardized tests. Based on the data, teachers compile a list of students who might require additional support in a specific core content area. The subgroups targeted are 3rd through 8th grade ELLs who are Entering or Emerging levels, long-term ELLs, SIFE and ELLs with disabilities. The intervention services are offered in English. ELLs who are able to participate in Title III after school program receive the intervention at that time in a small group targeted instruction. ELLs who are unable to attend after school, receive their intervention during ENL instruction. In order to deliver effective intervention, the ENL and content area teachers determine a focus area for each student and the academic language needed to successfully master the content. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Most of our ELLs, on all language progression levels, still struggle with writing. Our school has started to utilize the Teacher's College Program for writing school wide. We have started to see some improvement with all our students but we need to continue to use and work the program to see continued success. As a school, we have all agreed that our students need help acquiring and using Tier Two & Three vocabulary and need help with sentence structure. Our ENL teachers will use instructional moves that we have acquired from ELL Institutes and trainings to help reach our goals. We have also been able to get materials from National Geographic/Cengage Learning, which we hope will help us improve our pedagogy. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs are afforded the same services as the rest of the population. ELLs are welcomed into our Sports & Arts after school program, where there are staff that speak more than one language. We also had after-school support for ELA and Math City Wides and the ELLs were taught by teachers who used scaffolds that they felt would support the ELLs in particular. We all know that these "moves" helped the non ELLs as well. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Most of our long-term ELLs are still struggling with their writing skills so instruction has been focusing on the Writer's Workshop model and literature that is better suited for older students. Our students with disabilities (SWDs) are also invited to our after-school program and receive their 360 minutes of instruction to meet their needs. As far as ELLs that have attained proficiency, we support them for their first 2 years by continuing to provide them with 90 minutes of ENL/ELA or other content areas and their NYS approved testing modifications. They are also encouraged to attend our ENL after-school program, where they can get homework help and continue to work on their English skills. All ELLs (former, SWD and current) are also 4  invited to all our cultural and special events, such as trips, Hispanic Heritage Month celebrations, Chinese New Year celebrations and Cinco de Mayo celebrations , to name a few. Our ENL teachers also continue to work informally with their former ELLs in order to provide support when needed. Intervention programs for ELLs in literacy include after school programs, as well as tutoring services during the school day , twice weekly for SIFE and long-term ELLs. We also use technology to support literacy by using the "Imagine Learning" program and "BrainpopESL". We also use BrainpopEspanol and brainpopJr. to support science, social studies and math concepts. ELLs are also encouraged to use computer programs that are available to the whole school population such as "Study Island" and "Starfall". ELLs are afforded the same opportunities that the rest of the population are offered. Whenever possible, notices about events/or programs are sent out in as many languages as possible, so that all parents/guardians can know about offerings for their child. We are currently working on a grant where we will be receiving services and programs from the Houghton Mifflin Company. We would be using the Destination Reading and On our Way to English Programs. All teachers, as well the ENL teachers, would be trained how to use the Destination Reading Program and would also be given training on methods to help ELLs and other struggling students in their classrooms. Our ENL teachers currently use the "Reach" and "Inside Programs" by Hampton Brown, "On Our Way to English" by Rigby and "Academic Vocabulary Toolkit" by CENGAGE Learning. We also collaborate with the classroom teachers and provide support with Ready Gen. Native language support is provided by offering students literature in the native language. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Each parent/guardian is given a home language survey upon registration. This information is put into ATS and can be accessed through different reports. We also can get this information from student blue cards. Once we have this information, we use Spanish cognates (when applicable), native language books and we translate key vocabulary words and definitions that we get from Google translate to help support home language in our ENL program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. This is done as it is done for non-ELLs. ENL teachers teach and use scaffolds that are appropriate for students' age and grade level. Any services or workshops that the school provides for parents are targeted for all ages and grade levels, so that parents can have information that will help their particular child. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have no such activities. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 5  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ENL teachers attend workshops offered by the our Borough Field Support Office, Queens South. Our ENL coordinator has attended the ELL Instructional Leadership Institute (EILI) for the past two years and has brought back information to further ELL instruction. We have also attended Essential Elements of ELL /MLL Instruction and CALI institutes, along with NYSESLAT training and the ENL Summer Learning Series. These workshops have helped us to increase our knowledge and "step up" our pedagogy, keeping us centered around developing a common understanding of quality ENL instruction and how to put it into practice. We will continue to attend these workshops in the coming year, receiving our minimum of 50% of professional development through our Borough Support Field Center,Queens South ( and other sources), as they become available. The school provides a minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers, including assistant principals, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, psychologists, occupational/physical/speech therapists, parent coordinators,and our secretaries by offering PD's on Mondays, workshops after school or on Saturdays We often also have classroom teachers accompany us when we receive our BSFC's professional development , when they can receive classroom coverage and if the workshop would suit them.These professional development workshops are dedicated to language acquisition, including best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrated language & content instruction for ELLs. Our tentative professional development plan for school staff from our ENL department are as follows: Calendar of PD Days: October:" Identifying ELLS and understanding NYSESLAT scores/ 5 levels of language progressions, and how to incorporate them into planning." November:" Strategies to help ELLs in the classroom". January:" Supporting vocabulary development through word work and word play." March: "What is the NYSESLAT?" We will also continue to support staff during grade meetings, lunch & learns and informal meetings, filling in any gaps or questions that the classroom teachers might have. Attendance records/Agendas will be maintained in a binder by the ENL coordinator, as evidence of 15% & 50% of professional development trainings. The outlines of the presentations by the ENL teachers will be the description of the content of the workshops. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Questions 1 & 2 are answered together in number one of this section. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to parent-teacher conferences, the initial interview, and parent orientation & program selection session, the teachers plan to meet the parent/guardian of each ELL during "Parent Engagement" time on Tuesday afternoons. We will discuss the goals of the program, the child's NYSITELL/NYSESLAT results, and their language development needs.Teachers of content areas will be invited to take part of the meeting and share their thoughts regarding academic progress. We already have a basic invitation letter, translated into Arabic, Bengali, French, Haitian Creole , Spanish and Urdu.These letters were translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. We have in-house staff that cover several languages, should translation be necessary. If we do not have anyone who can translate into a specific language, we will contact the NYC Department of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit to get over-the-phone interpretation services. 6  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The school parent coordinator involves the parents by regularly scheduling parent workshops on various topics that address the needs of all parents, including ELLs. This year has seen parent sewing classes, help with internet resources, discussions about attendance & lateness, busing & transportation, helping your child at home, and helping your child to transition to kindergarten, just to name a few. Our principal holds "Farrows Parent Fellowship" meetings every other month, where she discusses pertinent topics and answers any questions or concerns that they might have All these meetings have in-house translators present. Our ENL teachers have just completed a workshop about helping your child during the summer months, so that our ELLS can maintain the progress that they have made this year. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. We have no further information at this time. 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Debra Farrow, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: William C. Hughley School DBN: 29Q116 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Debra Farrow Title Principal Isannah Winnah Assistant Principal Farida Mooklal Parent Coordinator Teresa Daleo-Doussi ENL/Bilingual Teacher To be completed Parent J. Rhuma/Speech Teacher/Subject Area M. Patton/SETTS Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Arnold Renois School Counselor Beverly Mitchell Marie Antoinette Rousseau Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Margarit Casaceli Other ENL teacher C. Adams N/A Other IEP Teacher Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 7/1/2017 7/1/2017 7/1/2017 7/1/2017 7/1/2017 7/1/2017 7/1/2017 7/1/2017 7/1/2017 7/1/2017 7/1/2017 7/1/2017 7/1/2017 7/1/2017 7/1/2017 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 29Q116 School Name: William C. Hughley Superintendent: Beverly Mitchel The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Margarit Casaceli ENL Teacher Teresa Daleo-Doussi ENL Coordinator Yes No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At PS/IS 116, Language preferences of the parent community are assessed based on the information completed on the HLIS. When A- one question on the HLIS Part I: questions 1-4 indicates that the student uses a language other than English, and B- two questions on the HLIS Part II: questions 5-8 indicate that the student uses a language other than English, and C- the interview with the parent and student indicates a language other than English, then that student is considered to have a home language other than English. Therefore, the home language is determined based on a combination of the interviews with the parent and student, and responses to the questions on the HLIS. The home language determination is not based solely on the responses to the questions (regardless of number of responses of one language or another). Over-the-phone interpretation services are available through the DOE’s Translation and Interpretation Unit so that parents can receive language assistance and have their questions answered in their preferred languages.For DOE transfer students , ATS reports can be accessed in order to identify the preferred home language. The HLIS should also be located in the incoming 0  student's cumulative folder. Information regarding parent language preferences can also be found in the Emergency Contact cards as well as surveys conducted at the beginning of the school year. We also use the ATS report called the Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL). The RAPL gets its information from part three of the home language identification survey(HLIS) , which is part of the packet given to all parents/guardians upon initial registration into the NYC school system. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3 14 1 700 1 4 0 69 7 Arabic Bengali Bambara English French Haitian Creole Slovak Spanish Urdu 3 14 1 700 1 4 0 69 7 .299% 1.386% .099% 69.3% .099% .396% 0 10% .69% . .299% 1.386% .099% 69.3% .099% .396% 0% 10% .69% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families Newsletters October-June Parent-Teacher notices September, November, March & May After school program information October & November Letters from school leadership/ Fliers for upcoming workshops September through June procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. DOE's Translation & Interpretation Unit/In-house staff. Given to Principal two weeks prior to distribution DOE's Translation & Interpretation Unit / In-house staff. Given to Principal two weeks prior to distribution. DOE's Translation & Interpretation Unit/ In-house staff. Given to Principal two weeks prior to distribution. DOE's Translation & Interpretation Unit / In-house staff. Given to Principal two weeks prior to distribution.Our school will provide language assistance for languages that are non-covered languages and that school personnel does not speak or write by sending a request for translation to the DOE vendor, "The Big Word" at NYCDOE@thebigword.com. They will then inform us of the cost and time line for particular translations. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Meet the Teacher Night September, 2018 In-House Staff Parent-Teacher Conferences November, March & May In house staff will provide interpretation. For languages not covered by staff, our school will utilize the Translation & Interpretation Unit's " Language Line", which provides over-the-phone interpretations in over 200 languages. We may also request an on-site interpreter through the DOE's vendor called "The Big Word". 2  Workshops to inform and teach parents information to help their children Meeting with Parents of ELLs September through June In-House staff/ T & I Unit Once Monthly October-June In-House staff/ T & I Unit 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School will formulate a list, taken from information from the ATS report RAPL, which lists parents' home languages. In-house staff will provide oral interpretation during an emergency by phone. In the case of low incidence languages, we will also endeavor to ask families for phone numbers of relatives/friends that could interpret for them during an emergency. We might also use the NYC DOE Translation & Interpretation Unit to interpret for us over the phone. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our administration will distribute and explain the Chancellor's Regulation A-663, as well as other Chancellor's regulations, at our first staff meeting in September. Staff will also be directed to ask the parent coordinator or ENL teachers if they have any questions about translation and interpretation services. We also post on a hallway bulletin board copies of the "assistance for teachers and administrators on NYC DOE language services" pamphlet, so that staff can peruse and keep a copy of this information for future use. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS/IS 116 fulfills parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services by providing each parent whose primary language is covered by the DOE translation service, and who requires language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities. The bill includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. We post the availability of interpretation services signs in each of the school's covered languages near the primary entrance of the school, and by including procedures for accessibility to the administrative office for parents who are in need of language access services in the school safety plan. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 3  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS/IS 116 uses parent surveys, PTA meetings, and parent/teacher meetings throughout the school year to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. 4 
