 25Q120 School Name: P.S. 120 QUEENS Principal: ROBERT MARINO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Public School 120 Queens 342500010120 Pre-K through Grade 5 School Number (DBN): 25Q120 58-01 136 th Street, Flushing, NY 11355 718-359-3390 718-460-4513 Phone Number: Fax: Robert Marino rmarino4@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Robert Marino ElizabethMoloney WinnieHsuehandHung Fee Chow Co Presidents Robert Marino Hung Fee Chow N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 25 Danielle DiMango Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place, Flushing, NY 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: ddimango@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-7605 Phone Number: 718-281-7519 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Long Island City, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-3918222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Robert Marino Elizabeth Moloney WinnieHsueh Caroline O’Shaughnessy Hung Fee Chow N/A N/A N/A Debra Fine Nicky Ginestri Karin Contreras Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Assistant Principal UFT Teacher Parent   Name Katherine Ventura Wanxian(Esther) Mai XiuzhenChen Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 120Q is dedicated to providing each student with optimal learning opportunities so that they can reach their full academic and social potential. Toward this end we dedicate available resources to ensure that:  Each student experiences success, feels cared for and positive about their involvement at PS 120Q  The staff works and shares as a collaborative team.  Teachers are motivated, enthusiastic, and experience continued professional growth.  We provide an environment which is safe, inviting and stimulating.    Our family community feels welcomed and valued as full participants in their child's education.  The leadership is supportive, encouraging, and fosters positive changes. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 120 is a Pre-K through Grade 5 school that has approximately 1,040 children comprised of 44% current (80% current and former) English Language Learners and 16% students with Special Needs. The majority of our children speak Mandarin, but we have a growing Latino and Middle Eastern population. Our Literacy and Mathematics Programs were selected in response to the needs of our ELL and SWD population. Both Reading Street and GO Math! include supports for English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities; among these strategies are: · Scaffolding techniques, including accessing prior knowledge, contextualization, schema building, previewing information, providing visuals and videos, text re-presentation and bridging. · Reading strategies, including deconstructing/reconstructing sentences, conversation frames for cause and effect, paragraph frames for summarizing chapters, and academic language frames for adding tier- two and tier-three words into oral and written communication. Enriching the Educational Experience for all Students : . STEAM: Students in Grades K-5 are programmed for STEAM with either Ms. Clark (K/1), Mr. Bebenroth, (2/3) Ms. Nossa (4), or Ms. Demetropoulos (5) for experiential project-based learning in Science and Technology. Three-Dimensional Learning: Three-Dimensional Learning shifts the focus of the science classroom to environments where students use disciplinary core ideas, cross-cutting concepts with scientific practices to explore, examine, and explain how and why phenomena occur and to design solutions to problems. Scientific Processes: Students investigate and build models and theories about the natural world and the key set of engineering practices that engineers use as they design and build models and systems. Cross-cutting Concepts: Students engage in cross-cutting concepts that have application across all domains of science. As such, they are a way of linking the different domains of science. They include: Patterns: similarity and diversity; Cause and Effect; Scale, Proportion and Quantity; Systems and System Models; Energy and Matter; Structure and Function; Stability and Change. Disciplinary Core Ideas: At PS 120 we link work across multiple sciences or engineering disciplines to be a key organizing concept of a single discipline. This provides a key tool for understanding or investigating more complex ideas and solving problems.· Saturday Family English Program 0   K-2nd grade Mandarin-speaking ELL families had the opportunity to participate in a six-week English-learning program. This pilot program provided fun activities and practical lessons to both students and parents to help them improve English language skills. Saturday CASA Shadowbox Theatre Arts program  P.S.120 partnered with the Shadowbox Theatre to offer our 3rd Grade ELL families a free Saturday educational program. The program provided our parents and students an opportunity to develop arts literacy together by learning puppet making and theatre arts. P.S. 120 strives to create an environment where all members are given the opportunity for their vision and voice to be respectfully received. Leadership roles are put into place so that responsibilities are delegated and information is shared. This allows teachers to take the initiative as a leader to share experiences, best practices and raise the level of achievement and success throughout the school. Teachers are encouraged to join committees (MoSL, PD, Core Inquiry, SEL, STEAM, etc.) so that programming and instructional decisions are shared among the staff. Additionally, best practices are shared through inter-visitations, walk-throughs, and professional learning showcases in which staff host one another and distribute resources. The Core Inquiry Team consists of a representative from each grade, as well as Administrators, and meets bi-monthly to analyze school-wide data, alignment, and to brainstorm new initiatives. Meetings provide opportunities for discussions regarding instruction, strategic decisions that affect student achievement, and the school’s day-to-day operations.  Core Inquiry Minutes are shared school-wide ensuring clear communication and cohesiveness.  Core Inquiry leaders meet to discuss and make decisions on implementation practices and what would best benefit P.S. 120. These ideas are brought to the other grade members to be discussed further in order to determine what best suits each grade’s needs.  Grade leaders represent each grade and act as a liaison to Administration for clarification. Grade leaders ensure the distribution and availability of any shared resources across the grade, fostering consistency and cohesiveness. Social-Emotional Learning:  In an effort to align our school vision for increasing social-emotional learning with the District 25 goals and the Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning (CASEL) standards, we have implemented several social-emotional programs and initiatives to better support our students’ engagement with social-emotional learning. Teachers across grade levels have been engaged in implemented the following in their classrooms:  RULER: Our primary resource for social-emotional learning is the implementation of the RULER program via Yale University. Each month, teachers have engaged students by introducing 4 Anchor Tools of Emotional Intelligence made available through the RULER program. The Anchors of Emotional Intelligence are evidence-based tools designed to enhance the emotional intelligence of school leaders, teachers and staff, and students and their families. The 4 Anchor Tools are:  o The Charter is a promise that teachers and students create together for how they want to feel in the classroom, what actions will promote those feelings, and agreed upon actions for how to prevent and manage conflict. At the beginning of the school year, sub-groups of staff members created Charters. A school-wide Charter was also created to consolidate the feelings of staff throughout our school community. In the beginning of the year, each teacher facilitated creating a Classroom Charter with their students.  1  o The Mood Meter is a tool used to recognize and understand emotions. The Mood Meter helps staff and students to understand that all emotions are ok as they learn to accurately label their emotions. o The Meta Moment is a 6-step process that teaches students self-regulation strategies and how to handle challenging moments daily. Teachers teach and model how students can deal with stressful situations and make appropriate choices when problem solving. o The Blueprint is a vehicle for conflict resolution. It teaches students how to be empathic and compassionate. Students use The Blueprint to talk with another student or students they are in conflict with and work together to solve the problems that they are experiencing.  Muttigrees: Through the Muttigrees Program, Willow was adopted as our school comfort dog and has become a vital member of our school community. Willow works in our school by visiting classrooms, participating in small groups, and works with students to help increase social-emotional awareness and self-regulation.  o Muttigrees Club: Select students who receive at-risk counseling in grades 4 and 5 are taught about social-emotional learning through the Muttigrees curriculum. These students also assist in helping to work with and train Willow. Social-Emotional Implementation Team: Representatives from staff sub-groups (i.e. school aides, teachers, counselors, etc.) within our school community meet weekly to discuss, evaluate, and implement elements of our school’s social-emotional learning programming.  Respect For All: The school community is engaged in opportunities to highlight and build upon ongoing discussions that promote respect for diversity and focus on preventing bullying, intimidation, and bias-based harassment. o No One Eats Alone and Know Your Classmates Day: Students engage in lunchtime activities in small groups that teach everyone how to make friends and end social isolation. o Anti-bullying Assemblies: Students engage in themes like kindness, diversity, equality, philanthropy, and anti-bullying.  Beautiful Me: Beautiful Me is an educational, self-esteem program designed to educate females by promoting appreciation for their genuine qualities, accurate self-awareness, and the satisfaction gained by helping others. Small groups of girls from Grades 4 and 5 engage in lessons geared towards the goals of the program.  Parent Involvement workshops held to introduce 4 Anchor Tools of Emotional Intelligence and support SEL learning RULER Parent Workshop Series This workshop series help parents have a better understanding of RULER, the social-emotional learning system we use at school. Introduction to RULER – 1. Creating a Family Charter 2. Understanding the Mood Meter 3. Meta-Moments Steps 4. Blueprint Child Center of NY Parenting Workshop Series The Child Center of NY – Flushing provide three parenting skills workshops for our parents in Mandarin and Spanish. 1. Cultural differences between China and America regarding child rearing 2. Helping your children dealing with emotional and behavioral issues 2  3. Effective communication skills between parents and children Mindfulness and Stress Reduction Parent Workshop Series The Mindfulness and Stress Reduction workshops provide various exercises and tools to combat stress as well as providing strategies to being more mindful in everyday life. The workshops provide a family and community connection and engagement as well as provide support to families on ways to manage their stress. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Yearly data indicates a growing ESL and Special Education population. We strive to support our students in both Literacy and Mathematics, selecting Common Core aligned Curriculum (Reading Street and GO Math!), to plan rigorous instruction. Special Considerations : · 982 Students currently in Grades K – 5 · 461 Current ELLs – 47% · 441 Former ELLs – 85% · 41 Students in Grades K – 5 that were proficient on either the LAB-R or NYSITELL Only 12% of the incoming Kindergarten class (2017-2018) tested proficient on the NYSITELL. Of students who were admitted during the 2017-2018 school year, only 15.2% spoke only English at home OR (if another language is spoken in the home) achieved proficiency on the NYSITELL. The data reflects that the majority of P.S. 120’s student population come from homes where English is not the primary language spoken. This data supports P.S. 120’s decision to choose Reading Street and GO Math! Fundations is implemented in Grades K and 1. These programs provide our students with structured support in vocabulary building, phonics and self-directed, hands-on activities which is a huge support for children (86% of our population) who have no English support at home because their parents lack proficiency in the English language. Addressing the Needs of Students with Special Needs : In an ongoing process of addressing the needs of all students, P.S. 120 has created an Integrated Co-Teaching Class on each grade, provides at-risk and mandated students with a SETSS Program, and supports adaptations in curriculum, pacing, instruction and assessment. Some of these adaptations include small group instruction, slower pacing, graphic supports, and the use of manipulatives, streamlining content and modified tasks/student outcomes. We have created four Bridge 12:1:1, classes; one Grades K-1, one Grades 2-3, and one Grades 4-5, to support the access and academic and social-emotional needs of students in a small, nurturing environment, and new this year, one bilingual Mandarin Grades K-1 to support not only academic but language needs of our students. ENL Learners Close Reading: Through the implementation of Maryann Cucchiara strategies in our literacy instruction, our ENL and AEL (Academic English language Learners) are supplied with the tools needed to tackle complex, compelling, and concise text. When reading text closely, our students have grown accustomed to highlight academic vocabulary, ask purposeful questions 3  that pertain to author’s craft and language, deconstruct long, embedded sentences, and engage in rigorous activities that are challenging yet approachable to demonstrate their understanding of content. Through these practices, students grow as confident, knowledgeable, mature readers rather than intimidated readers. Building Academic Vocabulary: Teachers across all grade levels strive to build academic vocabulary, not just in student writing, but also in student conversations. Students are exposed to a variety of word play strategies, such as Shades of Meaning, Act It Out (TPR), Feel It, Draw It Out, and Grow It, and sentence frames to better understand, acquire, and use words in context. Curriculum Modification: Teachers at P.S. 120 are currently modifying curriculum to better align with Next Generation Standards / Common Core Standards. Teachers are striving to routinely develop lessons that enable students to practice close reading complex text, using academic vocabulary in conversation and writing, and building knowledge. Academic Conversations: Academic discourse in the classroom is key in providing students with conversational skills that allow them to independently engage in extended, meaningful discussion about texts. Teachers have been combining Maryann Cucchiara strategies with other research-based practices (e.g. Dr. Jeff Zwiers, Socratic Seminar, Talk Moves) to foster classrooms where student-centered discussions and learning is a daily routine. Teachers provide students with academic vocabulary and linguistic frames to use in order to initiate topics, elaborate and clarify, support one another’s ideas, build or challenge each other’s ideas, make connections, or cite text details. Lab Site: P.S. 120 has been selected as a Maryann Cucchiara lab site school for District 25. Teachers across the district have been visiting our model teachers to observe best practices in engaging all learners in meaningful and effective close reads. We have programmed a literacy cluster for 2nd Grade students to support their growth in phonics and decoding. Ms. Raia will work with dynamic, flexible groups based on student readiness levels. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In looking at The Framework for Great Schools , P.S. 120 is proud to have made the most progress in Collaborative Teachers. P.S. 120 has several structures in place to provide time for teacher team meetings. Teachers on all grades will have at least one common prep period per week. Teacher teams meet weekly to discuss their professional learning. Teacher teams will analyzes student work, create, revise and norm rubrics, all with the ultimate goal of improving instruction and differentiating for individual needs. The team conversations are a pathway for the teachers to a greater understanding of the types of supports that are needed in order to assist children reach rigorous new standards and to improve their instruction. Academic vocabulary is an area of focus for P.S. 120. Teacher across the grades will analyze trends in student writing with particular focus on academic vocabulary. They will chart the trends and move towards their “next steps”. This work will build students’ academic vocabulary and as a result, improve student writing across subject areas. 4  · Teachers meet during common planning time, lunch periods, on Mondays during Professional Development, and Tuesdays during Other Professional Work Time. · Teachers meet to implement and develop instructional practices. · Teacher teams collaborate to examine the Common Core aligned Reading Program—Reading Street. · Units are examined to determine instructional components that are necessary and appropriate in order for all students to reach the expectations of the Next Generation Standards. · Modifications and revisions are made to the selected components to ensure that our large population of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities receive effective instruction of the Next Generation Standards. · Teacher teams meet during inquiry to assess, develop and modify rubrics in order for instruction and evaluation to be cohesive grade-wide. In addition, literacy rubrics are modified to ensure that students are aware of goals and expectations. · Teacher teams will share insights and strategies on effective practices that increase rigor to the GO Math! curricula e.g., small groups, Math games and projects. · Inter-visitation among ESL pedagogues will allow teacher teams to share effective instruction and strategies for our large ELL population, thus fostering cohesive improvement of outcomes for all English Language Learners. · Teacher teams will meet continuously in order to modify curriculum mapping units across instructional domains. During this process teacher capacity will be strengthened as curricula are revised to ensure effective integration of the Next Generation Standards and cohesive instruction across the grade. · Teacher teams across grades will share teacher created resources via e-mail. Resources will include effective templates to monitor data and effectively implement conference notes, lesson plans, rubrics, and student data sheets, all of which lead to the achievement of goals for individual, as well as groups of students. · Teacher teams across grades will continue to utilize a system of self-evaluation and reflection for students. This system allows students to reflect on their understanding, as well as inform the teacher of any guidance and support that is needed. Teachers will in turn form small groups based on the student self-evaluation. · Teacher teams meet in inquiry teams to discuss which assessments meet the needs of students in order to have cohesive assessments across the grade. 5  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q120 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1034 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 12 12 43 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 31 27 43 43 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 75.0% % Attendance Rate 72.7% % Reduced Lunch 41.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.1% 13.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 50.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 87% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 76 76 43 96.5% 1.1% 11.2% 0.5% 84.3% 0.6% 6 19% 7.2 66.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A NO N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A NO N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We believe that if we build “Strong Roots” in mathematics by exposing our students to a rigorous curriculum aligned with strong instructional approaches providing our students with a solid foundation to promote problem solving and opportunities to construct arguments using various tools and representations guided by thoughtful essential questions, quality assessments and response to intervention to build the conceptual understanding problem solving proficiency and computational fluency to provide access for successful entry into algebra, it will provide opportunity for all students to be regents ready by eighth grade 2021. In alignment with the NYCDOE expectations for “Algebra For All,” PS 120 seeks to ensure that all students have access to rigorous curricula and to academic supports to ensure greater algebra readiness. Theory of Action: If teachers engage in strategic partnership with Algebra for All, professional learning through the district and the BFSC, professional learning from our A4A team, and intervisitations to gain familiarity and comfortability with pedagogical techniques and strategies that foster active engagement in complex math tasks that encourage critical thinking to deepen conceptual understanding and problem solving skills, students will demonstrate increased positive mindsets around mathematics, resulting in a 5% increase in overall mathematics proficiency on the NYS Math Exam. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL 1 : Rigorous Instruction By June 2019, we will build “Strong Roots” in mathematics through the implementation of a “Theory of Action” which supports customized instruction, strategic programming and the development of two units of study on each grade that demonstrate alignment to the Next Generation Standards, to actively engage students in ambitious intellectual activity and development of critical thinking skills to deepen conceptual understanding, problem solving skills and computational fluency, resulting in a 5% increase in student mathematics proficiency on the New York State mathematics assessment, demonstrating progress toward the District Regents Readiness vision. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Instructional Program: Administrators  Teachers and Administrators will be Classroom Teachers trained to use the research-based methods of Algebra4 All. Students  Teachers will utilize the Tri-State Rubric to align/revise lessons, units and assessments to the New Generation Standards (NGS)  Teachers will design instruction (units/lesson plans) using the principles of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) which integrates multiple entry points to optimize levels of challenge and support to meet the needs of all learners. (Ongoing)  Teachers will modify instruction to provide scaffolding and varied instructional grouping to foster cognitive challenge and conceptual understanding so that all students are able to access challenging mathematical curricula. (Ongoing)  Teachers will actively involve students to develop the skills needed to ask clarifying questions to ensure understanding of mathematical problems. (Daily)  Teachers and paraprofessionals will work together in a collaborative fashion to design activities which encourage multiple representations of math problems, including the use of models, charts, graphs and tables. (Ongoing) Classroom teachers Students Classroom teachers Students Students · Classroom Teachers · Paraprofessionals  Administrators  Algebra4All Model Teachers  Classroom Teachers  Paraprofessionals September 2018 – June 2019 8   Teachers will provide opportunities for · Students students to engage in problem solving in lesson plans. (Daily)  Teachers, Administrators, Paraprofessionals will incorporate Math Talk Moves: Strategic discussion moves intended to facilitate classroom discussion and develop and deepen mathematical thinking. (Daily)  Math Talk Moves include: Classroom teachers Students Prompt - prompting students to answer a question Wait Time - providing adequate time for students to respond to a question Revoice - repeating a student’s answer to emphasize and clarify what the student said Restate - asking a student to restate what another student has said to ensure that students listen closely to each other Apply Reasoning - asking students to evaluate, critique, and use each other’s responses and strategies  Teachers will incorporate “Number Talks”, 10-15-minute daily routine taking place at the beginning of lessons, focusing on the development of mental math to develop math fluency skills and improve mental math strategies and foster student to student discourse in the mathematics classroom. (Daily)  Teachers will incorporate word problem deconstruction as a strategy for problem solving in lessons. (as appropriate)  Teachers will incorporate 3- Act Tasks, a whole group student-centered mathematics activity consisting of three distinct parts: an engaging and perplexing Act One, an information and solution seeking Act Two, and a solution discussion and solution revealing Act Three in which students must question, persevere, problem solve, and reason mathematically. (as appropriate)  Teachers will support students in using math sketches to learn abstract mathematical concepts. Math sketches, visual representations of how to Paraprofessionals Classroom Teachers 9  determine the solution to a problem, provide students with an alternate entry point in tackling a math problem through the use of diagrams, drawings, charts, number lines, etc. (Daily as appropriate)  Teachers will employ a range of strategies that are differentiated for individuals and instructional groups of students, including high achievers, ELLs and SWDs. (Daily) Strategies to Address SWD and ELLs :  Teachers will design instruction using the principles of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) which integrates multiple entry points to optimize levels of challenge and support to meet the needs of all learners to access grade appropriate, CCLS aligned mathematics curricula. (Weekly)  Students with varied levels of English proficiency in the same native language will be encouraged to work together and use the native language to enhance understanding to be able to access mathematical content, understand concepts and deeply engage in activities. (Daily)  Paraprofessionals will model strategies on a one-to-one (if applicable) and in the student’s native language (as applicable). (Daily)  Teachers will support students (including ELLs and SWDs) in identifying clear learning goals of topics and modeling strategies to improve their ability to understand mathematical concepts and engage in mathematical activities, thinking and discourse. (Daily) Classroom Teachers and Students Classroom Teachers Teachers and Paraprofessional Classroom teachers Students 0   High standards will be set in every classroom with a focus on engaging all students, including ELLs, SWD and high achievers, in intellectually active learning and challenging content by scaffolding the instruction to meet all needs. (Daily) Paraprofessionals  Classroom teachers Clusters and OTPs  Teachers, paraprofessionals, students, ENL teachers support staff and families will work together to improve student outcomes and develop a trusting relationship based on RULER and Respect For All. (Daily) Paraprofessionals Students Paraprofessionals Students  Classroom teachers  Clusters and OTPs  ENL teachers  Paraprofessionals  Students Engaging Families · Classroom Teachers  A workshop series on Conceptual Mathematics is planned to engage parents and increase student readiness in order to close the achievement gap · Clusters and OTPs · Paraprofessionals · Students  Throughout the year, built into the structure of the calendar, teachers and families have multiple pathways to meet and discuss student achievement. · September 6, 2018 – June 26, 2019  Administrators  Algebra4All Model Teachers  Classroom Teachers  Paraprofessionals 1   Teachers will meet parents in September, November, March and May for formal meetings. Teachers will converse with parents on a weekly basis, as per the UFT Contract  New PS 120Q website is continuously updated to provide families and the school community with support, resources and expectations for academic achievement, social-emotional learning and college and career readiness.  Bi-weekly newsletter is generated by administration to provide suggestions to foster student learning at home.  Our ELL families are offered regular group activities with our ELL Specialist who shares strategies on improving student instruction. Professional Learning and Trust: · Classroom Teachers · Clusters and OTPs September 6, 2018 – June 26, 2019 · Administrators · Teachers  16 days of Mathematics Professional learning will be provided from Ready Gen for Grade 5 math team  Professional learning opportunities for lower grade staff from Bank St.  Core Inquiry members, ELL and Special Education liaisons, as well as other staff members, will turnkey and provide Professional Development for teachers and paraprofessionals in Next · Paraprofessionals · Paraprofessionals · Students Peer Collaborative Teachers  Ready Gen Math  Bank Street 2  · Classroom Teachers · Clusters and OTPs · Paraprofessionals · Students  Peer Collaborative Teachers  Model Teachers Generation Standards Mathematics and Algebra4All.  Throughout the year, built into the structure of the calendar, full day Professional Development in September, November and June will be used to support pedagogy in both goal-related areas. Additionally, during Monday Professional Development, various inquiry groups will meet to further support instructional practices. Professional Development Committee will meet throughout the year to assist teacher needs and plan collaboratively based on the Google survey results.  Teachers, paraprofessionals and Administrators will maintain the transparent environment that demonstrates and builds trust by collaboratively identifying areas of need, and planning professional learning around Engaging Students in Learning.  Teachers, paraprofessionals and Administrators will maintain the transparent environment that demonstrates and builds trust by collaboratively identifying areas of need, and planning intervisitations 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. A parent engagement workshop will be provided during the year in October 2018 around the demands of the Next Generation Standards. Monthly Parent Participation Day Classroom Visit -All parents are invited into their child’s classroom to observe and participate in the learning activities monthly. A series of workshops based on Conceptual Mathematics is planned to engage and empower parents to support students in learning and help their children to increase skills to decrease the achievement gap. Coffee with the Principal - This monthly meeting with the Principal provides our parents with a forum to interact with Administration and Teacher Leaders, get information from the 3  school, ask questions and participate in interactive, experiential workshops. Two Family Math Nights are planned for the Spring Term 2019- one for upper grades and one for lower grades. The key personnel will be Administrators and Teacher Leaders. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Common Preps - Per Diem and Per Session -Advance Reports -Administration -OTP Staff -Core Inquiry Members - Algegbra4All Model Teachers -Weekly Professional Development -FSC Workshops -Algebra For All Workshops -Peer Collaborative Teachers -Model Teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The February 2019 practice NYS assessment will be administered and used as a benchmark towards our goal of achieving 5% increase in student mathematics proficiency on the NYS mathematics assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher Observations, practice exam for NYS math assessment 4  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We believe that social-emotional learning is essential to the personal and academic growth of our students. We believe personal and academic growth will be developed through ongoing professional learning opportunities for all school constituents so that students learn to recognize and manage their emotions, to develop positive relationships and productively work through challenging social and academic situations. Theory of Action: If we support the school community in integrating social-emotional learning into units of study by providing support through inquiry and professional learning as led by our SEL team and guidance department, then we will see a decrease in students engaging in level 2, 3, 4, and 5 infractions as evidenced by OORS data. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL 2: Supportive Environment: By June 2019, we will foster a Supportive Environment and build “Strong Roots” through professional learning that addresses core social emotional learning competencies led by all classroom teachers who will embed elements of RULER into each unit of study, and our school SEL team as evidenced by one school-wide professional learning cycle focused on social emotional learning resulting in a 3% reduction in level 2, 3, 4 and 5 infractions. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Guidance counselors and administrators will implement a professional learning cycle for staff to address core social emotional learning competencies leading to an improvement in learning climate and school culture for students. Teachers, School Aides, Paraprofessionals, OTPs September 6, 2018- June 26, 2019 Guidance counselors, administrators, peer collaborative teacher  Guidance counselors and peer collaborative teacher trained in RULER Feelings curriculum to further develop and grow school social emotional learning competencies leading to an improvement in learning climate and school culture for students. Teachers, students Summer 2018- June 26, 2019 Guidance counselors, peer collaborative teacher  Peer collaborative teacher to embed RULER Feelings curriculum in ELA lessons to ensure that students learn 15 grade band appropriate "feeling" words Teachers, students  We have two Guidance Counselors to support both mandated and at-risk students and support staff in integrating RULER in daily practice Students  Classroom teachers will demonstrate evidence of understanding of professional learning cycle and resiliency data by including/embedding it in lesson plans (Daily) Students September 15, 2018- June 15, 2019 September 6, 2018 – June 26, 2019 September 6, 2018 – June 26, 2019 Peer collaborative teacher Guidance counselors, administrators Guidance counselors, administrators  Support all staff members in the use of RULER strategies to support the positive link between recognizing and managing emotions and academic success.  Effectively increase the number of students who have access to counseling competencies through individual, small group counseling, and developmental school counseling classroom lessons focused on such topics as building healthy friendships, career awareness and exploration, Administrators, Teachers, School Aides, Paraprofessionals, OTPs, Office Staff Students September 6, 2018 – June 26, 2019 Guidance counselors, teachers, and administrators Guidance counselors September 6, 2018 – June 26, 2019 7  making choices, self-esteem, test anxiety, study skills, social skills, academic issues, time management, importance of education, career awareness, transitioning to middle school, and learning styles.  Students will attend weekly assemblies focusing on RULER activities run by guidance counselors, administration, teachers, and outside community organizations to highlight social-emotional traits and behaviors. Students Sept 15, 2018-June 23, 2019 Weekly  Grades will meet to determine grade appropriate Teachers Sept 6, 2018 strategies, resources and techniques in order to properly implement RULER.  Staff will continue to implement school-wide Student of the Month program focused on character education and tied to RULER to increase student motivation for positive behaviors. Students  Teachers will engage students in monthly read Students alouds from corresponding selected school wide Pre-K-2 and 3-5 Books of the Month specifically themed to the Character Trait of the Month which focus on different positive character traits and are integrated with RULER. Bi-Weekly Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept 25, 2018-June 23, 2019 Guidance counselors, teachers, administrators, outside organizations Guidance counselors, teachers, and administrators Guidance counselors, teachers, and administrators Guidance counselors, teachers, administrators, outside organizations Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Guidance Counselors Wednesdays and Fridays Sept 25, 2018-June 23, 2019 Daily Guidance counselors, teachers, and administrators  Muttigrees - Through the Muttigrees Program, Willow was adopted as our school comfort dog, working in our school by visiting classrooms, participating in small groups, and supporting students to help increase social-emotional awareness and self-regulation. Strategies to Address SWD and ELLS: Students  Skits, Visual Aids, Read Alouds, Role Playing, TPR, Modeling  Mood Meter Late Passes and Chart in lobby at entrance  Mood Meter poster in each classroom to reinforce and reflect social-emotional.  Use of Visual Aids with Mood Meter  Positive reinforcement 8  Respect for All- The school community is involved in opportunities to highlight and build upon ongoing discussions that promote respect for diversity and focus on preventing bullying, intimidation, and bias-based harassment.  No One Eats Alone Day and Know Your Classmates Day- Students engage in lunchtime activities in small groups to teach everyone how to make friends and end social isolation o Anti-Bullying Assemblies- Students engage in themes like kindness, diversity, equality, philanthropy, and anti-bullying  Beautiful Me- an educational self-esteem program designed to educate females by promoting appreciation for their genuine qualities, accurate self-awareness, and the satisfaction gained by helping others. Students March 2019 Guidance Counselors Teachers School Aides 4th and 5th grade female students January 2019- May 2019 Guidance Counselor Engaging Families:  Host parent workshops to reinforce RULER and promote use of recognition and management of social-emotional behavior techniques and strategies. Families September 2018 Community Organizations November Guidance Counselors o Teachers will increase the frequency of positive feedback to parents through various forms of communication. o Mindfulness and Stress Reduction Parent Workshop Series- provide parents with various exercises and tools to combat stress and become more mindful in everyday life as well as provide a family and community connection and engagement. o RULER Parent Workshop Series- a workshop series to help parents better understand the social-emotional system we use at school o Child Center of NY Parenting Workshop Series- Parenting skills workshops to foster more effective communication skills between parents and children and help parents support children with emotional and behavioral issues  Teachers will use RULER terminology and strategies during parent meetings to build effective home-school connections.  Work in partnership with other stakeholders to build stronger community relations and increase parent engagement  Recipients of Student of the Month awards will be recognized in monthly assemblies and given copy of Book of the Month. Families will be invited to attend Parent Coordinator All Staff 2018 March 2019 May 2019 Sept 30, 2018-June 23, 2019 9 All Staff Sept 30, 2018-June 23, 2019 Weekly or Bi-Weekly monthly assemblies and observe students receiving recognition and awards.  Bi-weekly newsletter Professional Learning and Trust: Teachers Paraprofessionals  Consult with teachers and staff about effective School aides strategies for assessing and resolving challenging student behavior. Guidance Counselors  Staff will work collaboratively to integrate RULER in all aspects of school culture.  Teachers will collaborate to share best practices in OTPs their classroom to implement RULER. Administrators  RULER best practices highlighted in Staff Weekly  Bulletin Social-Emotional Implementation Team-representatives from staff constituencies meet weekly to discuss, evaluate, and implement elements of the school's social-emotional learning programming. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. A series of Social Emotional Parent workshops will be provided to parents three times from Sept 2018-June 2019 to reinforce and further develop an understanding of RULER, a research based program social-emotional learning program, designed to help all members of our school community better recognize, understand, label, express, and regulate their emotions., to increase the social-emotional development of students and the recognition and management of social-emotional behavior techniques and strategies.. The key personnel will be Administrators, Teacher Leaders and Guidance Counselors. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Common Preps ● Per Diem and Per Session ● Advance Reports ● Administration 0  ● Guidance Counselors ● OTP Staff ● Core Inquiry Team Members ● Parent Coordinator ● Professional Development  Peer Collaborative Teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019:  Classroom teachers will teach Metamoment and Blueprint lessons of RULER and there will be evidence that students are aware of the tools and are using the tools as measured by focus groups conducted by the principal.  100% of students will be able to identify 7 out of 15 of the "feeling" words identified from the Feelings curriculum as measured by focus groups conducted by the principal.  Evidence of Charters for each stake holder group; classrooms, cluster teams, paraprofessionals, school aides, administrators. (In classrooms and hallways)  Evidence of Mood Meter (English, Mandarin, Spanish) in all hallways  Evidence of reduction of level 2, 3, 4, 5 infractions Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Evidence of Charters in hallways and classrooms, data from focus groups Data from OORS reports will be used as a benchmark to measure the goal of achieving a 3% reduction in level 2, 3, 4, and 5 infractions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Theory of Action: If we engage in thoughtful professional learning communities to delve into the practice of engaging students with rich, rigorous math tasks by studying subgroup data and strategically tailoring instruction to support unique student needs and learn from colleagues, we will show an increase of at least 10% increase in proficiency on the NYS Math Exam. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL 3 : Collaborative Teachers By June 2019, we will build “Strong Roots” in mathematics through the implementation of two inquiry cycles that focus on building teacher content knowledge and improving pedagogy within and across all grades resulting in at least a 10% increase in proficiency for targeted subgroups on the NYS Mathematics assessment. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Program Teachers. Professional learning designed to build content knowledge in mathematics and improve mathematical pedagogy will be implemented (Weekly). The vast majority of teachers will participate in professional, collaborative teams including grade level Inquiry Teams, vertical and horizontal Inquiry Teams, Grade Leaders, UFT Consultation Committee, Professional Development Committee, Pupil Personnel Team , Building Response Team, MOSL Team, Cabinet Team, common preps, grade meetings, and mentors to develop instructional systems that will impact change and support improved teacher practice. (Weekly, bi-weekly or monthly) All staff Inquiry cycles to be focused on: Teachers. Building content knowledge Improving mathematical pedagogy (Ongoing) Teachers will be scheduled to attend District, Queens North FSC, and City Professional Learning Workshops to build content knowledge and/or pedagogy in mathematics Teachers. Any staff member who attends a professional meeting will be responsible for turnkeying learned information to applicable staff members through Professional Development time or common prep/planning time. (As scheduled) Teachers. Fifth grade teachers with A4A training will serve as model classrooms for teachers to see strategies in action (weekly) Teachers. Teachers and teacher teams will design instruction using the principles of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) integrating strategies such as math talk moves, number talks, exploration, productive discourse, math sketches, and 3-Act Tasks. (Daily) Teachers, students September 17, 2018- June 3, 2019. September 17, 2018- June 3, 2019. Algebra4All Model teachers, administration, Peer Collaborative teachers Administration, peer collaborative teachers, teachers September 17, 2018- June 3, 2019 Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teachers September 17, 2018- June 3, 2019 September 17, 2018- June 3, 2019 September 17, 2018- June 3, 2019 September 17, 2018- June 3, 2019 Support staff Administrators, teachers, peer collaborative teachers, model teachers Algebra4All Model teachers Teachers, administrators, peer collaborative teachers, Algebra4All model teachers 3  The 5th Grade programming will be departmentalized and the 4th grade will be programmed to team teach (platooning) which through thoughtful scheduling, will allow for horizontal planning as well as vertical planning for both the 4th and 5th grade teacher teams. (Daily) Opportunities exist for colleagues to participate in voluntary intervisitations in an effort to share best practices throughout the year. Teachers, Students, Clusters and Support Teachers Teachers Opportunities exist for colleagues to participate in voluntary inter-visitations by model teachers and peer collaborative teachers in an effort to focus targeted practices throughout the year. Teachers Strategies to Address SWD and ELLs : · Vertical and horizontal teams will meet to discuss best practices and strategies for addressing SWDs and ELLs. (Bi-monthly) · Classroom Teachers · Support Teachers · Horizontal teacher teams will meet to analyze student data obtained from summative and formative assessments, student work, projects, and teacher feedback to collaboratively address strategies that will meet the needs of all learners. (Weekly) · Administrators September 6, 2018- June 26, 2019 September 17, 2018- June 3, 2019 September 17, 2018- June 3, 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teachers, clusters, support teachers Administrators, teachers, peer collaborative teachers, model teachers Administrators, teachers, peer collaborative teachers, model teachers · Teachers · Administrators · Support Staff · Paraprofessionals · Teacher teams will meet weekly in order to create and modify curriculum maps across instructional domains which address the specific accommodations and scaffolds for ELLs and SWDs. (Weekly) · Vertical and horizontal teams conduct data inquiry to analyze trends in SWDs and ELLs to develop strategies and implement practices to enhance their learning. (Bi-Monthly) Engaging Families : · Teachers will communicate with parents during parent engagement time on Tuesdays, preps and during parent conferences and meetings to engage parents in their child’s education, and share best practices on how they can support their child at home. (Weekly) · Teachers will plan and implement parent workshops on multiple content specific topics throughout the year (e.g., Family Math Night, Coffee with the Principal- 3 Act Tasks, etc.) · Families · Teachers September 2017-June 2018 · Administration · Teachers · Support Staff · Support Staff 4  in an effort to better integrate them into the school community. . Our school will livestream and record events, workshops and meetings to engage parents in their child’s education, and share best practices on how they can support their child at home.  Throughout the year, built into the structure of the calendar, teachers and families have multiple pathways to meet and discuss student achievement.  Teachers will meet parents in September, November, March and May for formal meetings. Teachers will converse with parents on a weekly basis, as per the UFT Contract  PS 120Q website is continuously updated to provide families and the school community with support, resources and expectations for academic achievement, social-emotional learning and college and career readiness.  Bi-weekly newsletter is generated by administration to provide suggestions to foster student learning at home. Professional Learning and Trust : · Teachers · Core Inquiry Team, Data Specialists, Administrators, ELL and Special Education liaisons will turnkey and provide Professional Development for teachers and paraprofessionals. · An environment of trust will be strengthened through collaborative practices and model lessons by Model Teacher and Peer Collaborative Teachers ·A Book Club to support 3c Engaging Students in Learning will be implemented on Tuesdays to enhance Professional Learning and develop a collaborative learning environment for teachers. · Teachers will continue to meet in Learning Groups to share best practices and analyze data. This sharing will build cohesiveness and will improve pedagogy. September 2018-June 2019 · Teachers · Support Staff  Peer Collaborative Teachers  Model Teacher 5  · Horizontal teams share teacher created resources vertically so they can modify and implement them effectively among their respective grades. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent engagement workshops will be provided to parents three times from Sept 2018-June 2019 focusing on the specific needs of mathematical conceptual learning and the Next Generation Standards in mathematics to provide parents with a background in the concepts and content their students are grappling with. The key personnel will be Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Teachers and Guidance Counselors. A series of workshops based on Conceptual Mathematics is planned to engage and empower parents to support students in learning and help their children to increase skills to decrease the achievement gap. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Common Preps ● Per Diem and Per Session ● Advance Reports ● Administration ● OTP Staff ● Core Inquiry Members ● Peer Collaborative Teachers ● Weekly Professional Development - Parent Coordinator -Model teacher Leaders Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant X X Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 6  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  The February 2019 practice NYS assessment will be administered and used as a benchmark towards our goal of achieving 3% of students receiving levels 3 and 4 on the NYS mathematics assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Assessment Tools;  February 2019 practice NYS assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We believe that the success of PS 120 is based upon the collective learning of all school community stakeholders. We believe that we will learn and grow as a school when administrators and staff utilize data to support decisions. We believe that we learn and grow as a school when we develop questions about our data. We believe that we will learn and grow as a school when we make inquiries to develop solutions to our questions. We believe that we will learn and grow as a school through strategic planning and delivery of AIS/support programs in reading designed to the needs of our students. We believe that we will learn and grow as a school when we develop action plans to support our inquiries. We believe that we will learn and grow as a school by evaluating the impact of our plan. Theory of Action: If we implement strategic structures such as digital F&P level tracker and utilize resources such as our Universal Literacy Coach, consulting and professional learning from Michael Vespe, guided reading kits, and enhanced classroom libraries, we will achieve a minimum of 2 level increase in F&P reading levels for 75% of students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL 4 : Effective School Leadership By June 2019, we will build “Strong Roots” by creating systems and structures that enable us to assess growth in reading resulting in a minimum of a 2 level increase in Fountas & Pinnell Reading levels for 75% of students in Grades K-5. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Program: Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration  Literacy team will be formed to focus on increasing student reading achievement 2 AIS teachers will work with 1st grade, 2nd grade lowest 1/3 readers (Daily) Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration Teachers, students September 2018 Administration, IEP teacher, teachers Teachers will be trained and normed in using universal screeners- DIBELS ((Dynamic Indicators of Basic Early Literacy Skills) a series of short tests that assess early childhood (K-6) literacy and Fountas & Pinnell Running Records to : Identify students who may be at risk for reading difficulties Help teachers identify areas to target instructional support; Monitor at-risk students while they receive additional, targeted instruction Reading team will analyze student data and assign a reading plan to best support students (Ongoing) Teachers, students September 2018 Students will be monitored and tracked for progress (Ongoing) Students September 2018 Teachers, Administration, IEP teacher Teachers, Administration, IEP teacher AIS/RtI programs include: Wilson Fundations Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Literacy Interventions (LLI) Teachers, students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, administration Orton-Gillingham SPIRE Wilson Just Words 9  Instruction to students will be provided before school, during school and after school (Daily, Three times weekly, as per program) Special Ed (Integrated Co-teachers) Teachers will be scheduled for guided reading with lowest 1/3 (reading) on their assigned grade for 1 period daily Teachers, students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration, teachers Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration, teachers Professional Development is available via the DOE, FSC, UFT and through webinars. Teachers, Administration Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration, teachers Teachers, students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers, ENL teachers, administrators Strategies to Address SWD and ELLs:  Supports for English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities such as; Scaffolding techniques, including accessing prior knowledge, contextualization, schema building, previewing information, text re-presentation and bridging will be used to help students to access content.  Reading strategies, based on Cucchiara methodology, to be used, including deconstructing/reconstructing sentences, conversation frames for cause and effect, paragraph frames for summarizing chapters, and academic language frames for adding tier-two and tier-three words into oral and written communication. , differentiating and providing scaffolds and strategies for instruction to SWD and ELLs. Engaging Families: Families Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration, teachers  Throughout the year, built into the structure of the calendar, teachers and families have multiple pathways to meet and discuss student achievement.  Teachers will meet parents in September, November, March and May for formal meetings. Teachers will converse with parents on a weekly basis, as per the UFT Contract  PS 120Q website is continuously updated to provide families and the school community with support, resources and expectations for academic achievement, social-emotional learning and college and career readiness.  Bi-weekly newsletter is generated by administration to provide suggestions to foster student learning at home.  Our ELL families are offered regular group activities with our ENL Specialist who shares strategies on improving student instruction. 0  English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) Instruction class to be taught by licensed DOE teacher on Saturdays September 2018-June 2019 Professional Learning and Trust:  An environment of trust will be strengthened through collaborative practices and norming of Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments and practice NYS ELA and Math assessments  Voluntary intervisitations, as well as Professional Development among pedagogues, promotes trust amongst colleagues which will increase student progress. Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration Teachers Peer Collaborative Teachers Model Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent engagement workshops will be scheduled monthly from September 2018-June 2019 to support parents in Preparing for State Exams, Stopping Summer Slide, Reading an IEP, Queensboro Library Parent Literacy Workshops, Queensboro Library Parent Workshop around the demands of providing strategies to ELLs and SWDs, and Coffee with the Principal, the key personnel will be Administrators, Spec Ed teachers, Classroom teachers, Teacher Specialists, Guidance Counselors, Outside Agencies. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Common Preps ● Per Diem and Per Session ● Advance Reports ● Administration ● OTP Staff ● Core Inquiry Members ● Parent Coordinator 1  ● Weekly Professional Development Peer Collaborative Teachers   Model Teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 35% of those students identified will show growth of at least one level, as measured by Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We believe that our school will establish “Strong Family Community Ties’ by creating a welcoming and inviting school culture that will strategically connect families to strategies and community resources that strengthen and support students’ personal academic behaviors. We believe families should be provided with opportunities to support school planning, engage in meaningful volunteering and leadership roles and be provided with opportunities for professional learning. We believe that we will deepen home school relationships by strategically planning strategic parent professional learning opportunities that directly impact the needs of our students. Theory of Action: If we continue to welcome parents into our community of learners through strategic workshops to help them to reinforce school initiatives at home, we will see an increase in parent involvement and student readiness. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 5: By June 2019, we will build “Strong Roots” by empowering parents through strategic parent professional learning opportunities resulting in at least 3 workshop series as evidenced by agendas, workshop presentations and sign-in sheets; one series is to be an ESL class for parents, one series Social Emotional Learning, one series Mathematics Conceptual Learning. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Program: Implement an "English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) Instruction" class to be taught by licensed DOE teacher (weekly) Families September 2018- June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, DOE staff October 2018/ December 2018/ February 2019 November 2018/ January 2019/ March 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Model teachers, Peer Collaborative teachers Administration, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors Parent Coordinator, Bilingual School Aide, Administrators, Teachers, CAPA Director and Staff Implement a professional learning series focused on Mathematics Conceptual Learning for Families (3 times) Families Implement a professional learning series focused on Social-Emotional Learning for Families (3 times) Families Families  PS 120’s Parent Coordinator is bilingual Mandarin/English, with the capability to facilitate more active engagement with parents in the school community in person, by telephone, and through email and school correspondence. (Daily)  A reception desk in the main office is staffed by a bilingual Mandarin/English school aide who is able to greet families, support translation and field whatever inquiries or concerns families may have. (Daily)  Frequent parent workshops will be offered in a variety of pertinent topics, including state exams, Next Generation Standards, book clubs, to help parents actively engage in their child’s education. (Monthly) 4   Events, such as movie nights, will be scheduled in the evenings as well as the afternoon to increase family engagement. (Bi-Monthly)  Through our ongoing partnership with the Chinese American Parent Association (CAPA), PS 120 will continue to participate in community outreach by inviting parents to visit the program director during the daily office hours and foster active communication between the CAPA staff and families in both English and Chinese to update parents on student progress.  Parent Coordinator works with our community of volunteers who will work in our school community in a variety of settings, including as class tutors, library support, trip chaperones.  Cornell University Cooperative Extension, the Parent Coordinator hosts a free Nutrition and Health Program for Mandarin-speaking parents  The Child Center of NY will present a series of parenting workshops Strategies to Address SWD and ELLs: Families Sept. 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals PS 120 has an assistant principal dedicated to Special Education. In addition to her responsibilities pertaining to compliance and classroom instruction, she is tasked with ensuring that parents of Students with Disabilities are represented at school functions and events in the same ratio as other students. PS 120 has an assistant principal dedicated to English Language Learners (ELLs) and ensuring that the families of ELLs continue to be informed of student services and are represented in the school community in the same ratio as other students. Engaging Families: Families Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Assistant Principal 5   Families will have the opportunity to increase their involvement through interaction with the Parent Coordinator.  Families can serve as classroom volunteers  Special Education teachers and Assistant Principal host monthly meetings for parents of SWD to support their children’s education, provide strategies to help them reinforce concepts taught at school, support social-emotional development and foster parent engagement.  PS 120Q website is continuously updated to provide families and the school community with support, resources and expectations for academic achievement, social-emotional learning and college and career readiness.  Bi-weekly newsletter (translated) is generated by administration to provide suggestions to foster student learning at home.  Our ELL families are offered regular group activities with our ENL Specialist who shares strategies on improving student instruction.  Multicultural Night to celebrate different cultures that make up our school community  Plan a Latin Fiesta to embrace and empower our growing Hispanic community Professional Learning and Trust: Families Sept. 2018-June 2019 All staff 6  Our parent outreach strategies will foster a feeling of community between families and school- based staff. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Chinese American Parent Association, Child Center of NY, Cornell University Cooperative Extension Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Administration - Parent Coordinator - Bilingual School Aide - OTP Staff - Core Inquiry Members - Parent Coordinator - Weekly Professional Development - Per Diem and Per Session -Guidance Counselors Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, one series of parent professional learning will be launched, as measured by evidence of agendas, workshop presentations and sign-in sheets Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 7  Parent Surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) During school day-lowest 40 2nd graders in areas of decoding and phonics- Before school Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Fundations Push in Before school F & P Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) One-to-one During school day Small Group After school Guided Reading SPIRE Orton-Gillingham Whole Group & after school group- gr 3-5 lowest 1/3 derived from formative assessments (F & P, DIBELS) CCLSaligned Problem Solving SmallGroup Before school Whole Group During school day Math Vocabulary Development Mathematics Lowest 1/3 derived from formative assessments After school Before school Math Games & after school group- gr 3-5 lowest 1/3 derived from formative assessments Use of MathManipulatives Use of Thinking Maps (Graphic Organizers) DIBELSMath 9  Science Lowest 1/3 derived from summative assessments Science Vocabulary Push-in During school day Development Small Group STEM projects to support Science Inquiry Whole Group Social Studies Lowest 1/3 derived from summative assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Referral from Administrators, Staff, Parents Thinking Maps (Graphic Organizers) Social Studies Vocabulary Development Project Based Learning Use of Non-Fiction Trade Books Thinking Maps (Graphic Organizers) RULER Use of Life Skills to Address: Small Group During school day Whole Group One to One During schoolday Small Group Whole Group Self Esteem Communication Social Skills Drugs & Alcohol Violence Prevention Anti-Bullying Character Development 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Basic/Emergency Supplies Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. P. S. 120 receives many resumes throughout the year, which are sorted and filed by license area. The Teacher Finder support service on the DOE website is utilized as well to search for resumes. When a vacancy arises, all resumes are reviewed by the Principal and the Assistant Principal supervising the license area. If deemed qualified, candidates are asked to interview. With such a large ESL population, when possible, P. S. 120 tries to hire teachers who possess a dual license- ESL along with a Common Branch and/or Early Childhood License. P.S. 120 attracts highly qualified teachers by using a rigorous interview process:  Utilize the Open Market search for candidates  The Principal and Assistant Principals formulate interview questions  Candidates meet with the Principal and Assistant Principals and Hiring Committee  Satisfactory candidates are required to present a demonstration lesson with P.S. 120 students for a hiring committee consisting of teachers and administrators P.S.120 maintains highly qualified teachers by:  We attract and retain highly qualified teachers by expressing to applicants our school’s goals and mission, as well as demonstrating the professional support that is offered to our staff through the various professional development opportunities provided. o Professional Learning Plan to Retain Highly Qualified Teachers A concise needs assessment is conducted A specific area of need is been identified based on aforementioned needs assessment The professional learning plan is guided by research-based best practices that align to the specified areas of need found within the needs assessment 3  The professional learning plan contains a clearly defined set of expectations for all constituents The professional learning plan provides opportunities for staff to apply, deliberately practice, receive feedback, reflect and receive reinforcement The professional learning plan includes the routine evaluation of practice and its impact on teaching, learning and student outcomes.  Personal Professional Learning Plans for each teacher  Monday Professional Learning  Tuesday Other Professional Work (When Needed)  Wednesday Focused Walkthroughs with specific targeted feed up, feed back, feed forward and next steps  BFSC PLO - Boro Field Support Center Professional Learning Opportunities- Cycles of Targeted Professional Learning  AP Office Hours  New Teacher Mentoring  New Teacher Meetings 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  Teachers are provided with planning days to work together to combine ideas and to provide vertical articulation for effective planning, the use of authentic assessment tools, and to develop curricula and instructional materials.  A mentoring plan is developed for new teachers to help maintain and keep our highly qualified teachers. We provide a collegial atmosphere.  Professional development for Classroom Teachers and Support Staff with Assistant Principals  Common Preps Scheduled for each grade  Monthly Principal’s Conferences- Principal  Monthly Assistant Principal’s Conferences- Assistant Principals   Special Education Liaison Meetings- AP, Supervising Spec Ed and Spec. Ed. Liaison Job Embedded Support for Advance (JESA) - with Debbie Winkler (District 25 TDEC -Teacher Development & Evaluation Coach- for Administration Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 4  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). -Orientation for students in June for the following school year -Pre-K Mommy & Me Activity in the classrooms -Open House for Incoming Families -Multiple parent involvement opportunities- Halloween, Thanksgiving celebration, Winter events, Chinese New Year, Moving Up Ceremony, Dinner Theatre, visiting artists in residence, Shakers-Bakers, Long Island Children's Museum Science Activity 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. -Measures of Student Learning (MoSL) Team- Selects recommendations of local assessments -Core Inquiry Team- comprised of classroom teachers, cluster and administrators -Monday Professional Development with Assistant Principals target to improve instruction based on the needs identified in cycles of observation and student data -Grade level teacher inquiry teams meeting to analyze student work 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B 5  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 417,104.00 134,906.00 47,972.00 0 5,075,639.00 X X X X X See Action Plan See Action Plan See Action Plan See Action Plan See Action Plan 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 6   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P. S. 120Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Our school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P. S. 120Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, STEAM and the use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 8  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, social-emotional learning, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary education Act; 9  Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the 2018-19 school year  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee  supporting or hosting Family Day events; such as the !st Grade Picnic in Flushing Meadow Park, STEAM Family Day at the Queens Zoo, Multicultural Night, Dads Take Your Child to School Day, Queensboro Hill Library Family Literacy Workshops, Cornell University Cooperative Extension Nutrition and Health Program for Mandarin Speaking parents,  establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progres  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; 0   hosting Coffee with the Principal with K-1, 2-3 and 4-5 grade band parents to foster communication in an informal setting Additionally: The Parent Coordinator offers math and literacy workshops throughout the year. These workshops teach parents how to support their children's math and literacy skills at home. Parents are invited to attend workshops given by the DOE on various topics such as literacy, Special Education, English Language Learners, Pre-K. The Parent Coordinator trains the parents to access the DOE website to acquire valuable information regarding their children's education. The Parent Coordinator, with support from Community Based Organizations, organizes and provides workshops on topics ranging from nutrition, health, mindfulness and stress reduction, assessments and information on helping their children to succeed. A workshop for parents will be scheduled in February on test-taking strategies prior to the NY State ELA and Math Exams. The P.S. 120Q website www.ps120Q.org has links to websites that will help parents support their children's learning at home. Links include: The New York State Department of Education with Learning Modules, Common Core Learning Standards and sample test questions at www.NYSED.gov and www.engageny.org. Brain Pop Jr with videos and interactive quizzes at www.brainpopjr.com. Literacy and reading support for early readers at www.Starfall.com Fun interactive math practice can be found at www.arcademics.com/games. Another interactive math site is www.coolmath-games.com. Typing and word processing practice is found at www.typingtest.com/games.html. Monthly, on the P.S. 120Q website, www.ps120Q.org each grade level teacher team and the cluster team uploads a posting updating parents on content area units' goals and strategies so that parents can support their child at home. P. S. 120Q continues to purchase e-books with Universal Access that can be viewed from home, as well as any classroom. The use of e-books enhances the home-school connection and support parent involvement. Parents are invited to attend all culminating Arts performances. In mid-September 2018, at the first Parent-Teacher Conference, parents are invited to "Meet the Teacher" sessions in which they are presented with an overview of the grade-level curriculum, expectations and supports available for their children. In October 2018 fathers, grandfathers, and male guardians will be invited to join Principal Marino to the P.S. 120Q 4th Annual Dads Take Your Child to School STEAM Day (DTYCTSD) to have breakfast with the principal and to celebrate 1  the role of male role models in supporting their child's education. Over one hundred fathers and other male guardians are expected to attend the breakfast and take part in STEAM activities which has become an annual tradition. Parent Support services are provided to all parents. The bilingual Chinese Guidance Counselor and Parent Coordinator are available to lend support to ESL parents. The Guidance Counselor meets with parents individually and in groups. Parents receive guidance and referrals to community-based organizations. P.S. 120Q hosts the Chinese American Parents Association (CAPA) which provides a 120 seat (fee-based) after school program. In this after school model, students of P.S. 120Q will receive extra support to supplement instruction given during the school day. A "Contact Sheet" was created with photos of the Administrators, Guidance Counselors and Parent Coordinator so that students will be aware that they always have someone to go to for support, guidance and assistance. A large chart will be made and placed in each classroom so students are familiar with names and faces of the people who support them. A Student of the Month program was created to recognize students who have exhibited positive behavior, character, and improvement and an award ceremony was combined with the Parents Association meeting to promote the students' achievements and positive school culture. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 120Q in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 2  ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● ensuring that information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 3  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement and social-emotional learning of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 4  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 12 8 4 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 120 Q anticipates having the following Title III instructional programs: New York State English Language Arts/NYSESLAT Test Preparation Program: This program is designed for students in grades 3-5. Students will be selected for this program based on results from the 2018 June Instructional Reports and the most current ELL Data Analysis Tool (September 2018 for the 2018-2019 school year). Students in Grade 4 and Grade 5 will be selected based on their New York State English Language Arts Standardized Test Scores from Spring 2018. Grade 3 students will be selected based on 2018 NYSESLAT scores. We are going to examine each modality based on student data; at this time, we anticipate from previous years the need to focus on constructed response (written) items. Last year's 3rd-4th Grade students in particular scored 3-10 percentage points below the NYC average on every standard in the "Writing to Sources" constructed response sections of the ELA exam. Students who are on the fringe of moving up a level will be selected for the test preparation program. The program will focus on English language vocabulary development through core content area subjects as aligned with New York State standards. The program will focus on explicit reading and writing instruction for close analytic reading of varied texts, and accompanying written responses citing textual evidence. The program will also focus on the development of the required text dependent analysis as aligned with New York State standards. Children will be focusing on reading and writing in the English language through core content matter. Children will be grouped flexibly and either team- or parallel-taught by teachers with CB and TESOL licenses. Varied non-fiction/fiction texts aligned with New York State standards will be used for close analytical reading of texts and responding to text-dependent questions. Lessons will include but are not limited to identifying key ideas of the text, targeting and determining meaning of key academic vocabulary and analyzing text structure. Lessons will also include ‘word play’ activities (Cucchiara strategies). In addition, lessons will include conversations focused on various academic vocabulary, sentence deconstruction/reconstruction and analyzing phrases, structures and cohesive devices. Multiple entry points will be accessed through the use of various word play activities and the use of multiple thinking maps and graphic organizers to assist in reading and writing. We anticipate purchasing supplemental materials (i.e. Booksource or Coach test preparation) to reinforce reading and writing skills with texts distinct from those used in daily instruction. Via these meaningful learning experiences, we anticipate higher scores for the New York State English Language Arts Test and NYSESLAT, particularly in our constructed response scores. The purchase of English language arts test preparation workbooks will be used as an extension to support reading and writing. These workbooks will be aligned with New York State Standards and will support ELLs with varied read-alouds, shared reading, independent reading and writing. Workbooks will include interim and formative assessments designed to inform teaching 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information and improve students learning in grades 3-5. Students will use these workbooks to strengthen their reading, writing, listening and speaking skills. These workbooks will be structured with daily lessons that focus on reading, writing, speaking and listening skills that emphasize academic vocabulary. In addition, linguistic frames will be used as structures for essay writing. As applicable, teachers will utilize Bilingual Glossaries in the students' home languages as references to assist with ELA test preparation. We anticipate morning test preparation sessions, from Monday-Friday 7:15 am-8: 00 am. Specific dates/times will be determined in conjunction with the teachers who apply for the program. This program will begin on or near January 7, 2019 and continue through mid-April 2019, in order to help students perform on the New York State English Language Arts Test and NYSESLAT. Attendance records will be maintained by collecting daily attendance from each session, and monitoring consistent attendance. All program applications, letters, and attendance outreach will occur in the parents' preferred language. Saturday Art Residencies Program: This program is designed for entitled students in grades K-3. Student selection criteria will be based on data from the most current ELL Data Analysis Tool: 2018 NYSESLAT test scores will be used to select students in Grades 1-3, and Kindergarten students will be selected based on their NYSITELL scores. Entering/Emerging students will be selected first. The goal of the Saturday art residencies program is to increase students' productive language skills (Speaking and Writing, two modalities in which P.S. 120 ELLs struggle). We are going to examine each modality based on student data from the ELL Data Analysis Tool. Preliminary analysis (EDAT tab 2) indicates that last year's ELLs scored considerably lower on the NYSESLAT Writing and Speaking modalities when compared to Listening and Reading. (Speaking: between 4-12 students per grade scored low in this modality; Writing: between 7-20 students per grade scored low in this modality) Students on the fringe of moving up a level, will be selected for the program. In the past, our Saturday program has featured 3-4 different Arts residencies. This year, rather than rotate through so many offerings, we wish to partner with a residency that can offer a more comprehensive half-day program in which our ENL students work together to create an original piece. Via music, theatre, storytelling and/or dance, our ENL students will participate in shared language experiences. Students will create and develop fictional stories in print, write and perform music/lyrics and original scripted plays. In addition, problem solving and team building skills will be activated through hands on learning experiences. Through shared language experiences that will help to build background knowledge and English vocabulary, teachers will then scaffold writing and speaking responses to develop these two modalities. Our residency will utilize multiple learning modalities to engage visual, kinesthetic and auditory learning styles. Possible partners include Shadowbox Theater, NYC Children's Theater Residency, or Inside Broadway Residency. All residencies will begin in January 2019 and will end May 2019. Students will meet with their residency instructors once a week, for a three-hour period on Saturday mornings. Students will be scheduled to attend the program from approximately 8:00 a.m. – 12:00 p.m. (breakfast and lunch included from School Foods) Attendance records will be maintained by collecting daily attendance from each session, and monitoring consistent attendance. All program applications, letters, and attendance outreach will occur in the parents' preferred language. We anticipate 1 group that will consist of 30 ENL students in grades K-3. We look forward to having a mixed-age group to encourage teamwork and mentoring among older and younger students. Teachers will be TESOL/Bilingual certified, or content area teachers will team-teach with someone who is 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information TESOL/Bilingual certified. Teachers will be provided with professional development for a minimum of 6 sessions occurring every other Saturday beginning in January 2017 and ending in March 2017. These sessions will occur from 8:00-8:30 am prior to the start of the Saturday program. Professional development will focus around scaffolding constructed responses: shared writing, oral presentation skills, Accountable Talk, etc. as well as planning for the children's performance. In addition to a Saturday residency, we may explore the possibility of hosting a residency for an after school program as well. The population would be the same, and the group would meet once a week on Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday afternoons. We will survey parents to see which date/time is the most feasible; if funding allows, we could have one group during the week and one on Saturdays as well. We look forward to partnering with local residencies to continue our successful Arts and Language programs, as engaging young people in the arts has a positive impact on their cognitive, emotional and social development, and furthers a lifelong appreciation of the arts. These residencies will meet and support New York State Arts Standard 1, which states, “The students will use voice, gesture, movement and observation to express their experiences and communicate ideas and feelings. The students will imitate experiences through pantomime, play making, dramatic play, story dramatization, story telling and role playing.” In addition, all residencies will meet New York State standards in English Language Arts. For example, students will communicate skills via oral directions, they will develop cultural understandings through foreign dance and through the history of dance, they will read, write, listen and speak for information, literary response and expression, and speak for social interaction through their storytelling experiences. Art Residencies will also meet and support multiple ESL learning standards, Standard 1, “Engage in collaborative activities through a variety of student groupings to read, gather, share, discuss, interpret, organize, and present information.” Students will also “Listen attentively and take turns speaking when engaged in pair, group, or full-class discussions on personal, social, and academic topics.” Via these experiences, we are anticipating higher levels on the NYSESLAT in all modalities, and we hope to improve our performance specifically in Speaking and Writing. Lastly, P.S. 120Q looks forward to participating in the 2018-2019 Family English Initiative, a program from the Division of Family and Community Engagement that we have hosted since January 2017. This program runs 10-12 sessions; depending on interest and enrollment we may run 2 cycles through the year. Interested Kindergarten-2nd Grade families (our goal is to enroll 50 families) will attend P.S. 120Q for approximately four hours every Saturday. The first 90-120 minute block will involve shared language experiences and parent-child engagement; early childhood reading strategies based on the research of Queens College Linguistics Professor Dr. Elizabeth Ijalba will be featured. This portion of the morning will be bilingual (Mandarin-English). Afterwards, parents will separate for adult ENL instruction while children play in learning centers and eat lunch. The adult ENL classes will incorporate the Ventures curriculum (of Cambridge University), which includes 3 levels of thematic books and workshop materials for parents. The goal of this program is to support shared language experiences and English language development holistically, with ENL students and their parents learning English together. As in past semesters, FACE places teaching staff and a site coordinator at P.S. 120 with no program cost to our school. Family English is advertised with posted/distributed flyers, an information session, and a participant needs survey. Attendance records will be maintained by 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information collecting daily attendance from each session, and monitoring consistent attendance. All program applications, letters, and attendance outreach will occur in the parents' preferred language. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Test Preparation Program Professional Development: During Professional Development, P.S. 120 Core Inquiry Team members will present an overview of the New York State English Language Arts Test to the staff participating in Test Preparation Program, and discuss the three subtests included in the test. This two day session includes a detailed description of the types of questions and the rubrics used to measure reading comprehension and written responses on the test. In addition, the sessions will include the modeling of key instructional strategies for teaching ELLs such as practicing conversations focused on various academic vocabulary, sentence deconstruction/reconstruction and analyzing phrases, structures and cohesive devices. Teachers will utilize CCLS-aligned test prep materials in order to improve the students’ language skills and familiarize them with test taking strategies. Our ENL staff (Self-contained ENL/Bilingual teachers as well as TESOL-certified push-in/pull-out instructors) serve as a resource to the entire staff. These staff members model and share strategies and best practices for stand-alone and integrated ENL instruction. Approximately 40% of our students are current ELLs. The majority of our students were LEP when they started at P.S.120 and have since tested out (80% current and former ELLs). Our students are at different levels of language acquisition, with new admits generally scoring Entering/Emerging on the NYSITELL and achieving English proficiency according to subsequent years of ENL service. We also have a high mobility rate; students are admitted and discharged throughout the school year. It is therefore imperative that P.S. 120 teachers share appropriate strategies to help our LEP students learn English and demonstrate cultural sensitivity regarding our diverse population. Strategies used by ENL teachers in literacy and content area instruction are shared during professional development and team collaboration. ELL data analysis is facilitated during professional development sessions as well as grade level Inquiry meetings, as teachers seek to collect and analyze student data, and use this to inform their instruction. Art Residencies Professional Development: During Professional Development, one to two of our ENL teachers and literacy teachers who are working the program will present an overview of Incorporating Reading, Writing, Listening, Speaking Skills Into The Arts Residencies to staff members selected to work Saturday Program. There will be a minimum of 6 sessions occurring every other Saturday morning beginning in January 2019 and concluding in March 2019. Professional Development includes a detailed description of how instructional strategies can be used to facilitate reading, writing, speaking and listening skills into The Art Residencies program. During this session, ENL teachers will model key instructional strategies and methodologies for teaching ELLs such as, "turn-and-talk/think-pair-share”, linguistic frames, Shades of Meaning and visual aids to support ELLs and increase 0  Part C: Professional Development English language development. In addition, teachers will model how to utilize academic language and multiple entry points (UDL) within each program. Professional Development will also be provided by all Art Residencies and will include an overview of each program. These sessions will include detailed descriptions of program goals, strategies to support ELLs reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills, and a culminating performance component. Assistant Principal (TESOL certified) Jacqueline Momoh and the ENL staff at P.S. 120Q will facilitate ENL professional development and data analysis for the Saturday Arts Residency program and Family English Initiative. Professional development will occur at no additional cost during the regular school day, or at a per-session rate outside of school hours (before/after school or Saturday mornings). Agendas and attendance records will be maintained by collecting daily attendance from each professional development session. All program applications, letters, and handouts will be documented and kept on file; electronic copies will be saved in each teacher's Personal Professional Learning Plan. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: PARENT/COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT Parent Introduction to the Arts Residencies workshops and Family English Initiatve sessions will be implemented by our bilingual Parent Coordinator and bilingual Guidance Counselor. These workshops will assist parents in becoming more involved and knowledgeable with regard to their child’s academic and arts residencies program. Parents will be provided with Art Education and/or Family Engagment/Adult ENL classes which will be scheduled weekly. Parents will be assisted with how to support the arts and English language development at home. Parents will be given strategies in their native language, to use to help support their child’s academics and art education at home. Budget permitting, resources will be provided for parents to use at home with their child. Parent Introduction to the New York State English Language Arts Test Preparation for ELLs workshops will be implemented by our bilingual Parent Coordinator, bilingual Guidance Counselor, and ENL Coordinator. These workshops will assist parents in becoming more involved and knowledgeable with regards to their child’s educational program and assessments. In addition, parents will be assisted with and given ENL strategies to use to help support their child’s test preparation skills at home. Resources will be provided for parents to use at home with their child. Parent involvement activities geared toward our multilingual population will continue. Family literacy nights and family math night have been expanded to other curriculum areas to support the school’s effort in making sure that parents have the opportunity to actively participate in their children’s education. Parents will be invited to various Art Residency showcases that will 1  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities highlight student development and achievement through the arts. Translated letters and notices in the home language (based on “Home-Language Survey” and the ATS RAPL report) will be sent home to parents to communicate upcoming events. After school and/or evening activities will be scheduled during the 2018-2019 school year. Our mission is to expand the communication skills of our students and their families. A meeting will be scheduled in mid September to acquaint newly arrived parents and their children to our school. At this time parents are invited to “Meet the Teacher” and listen to an overview of the programs offered to our children. In addition, support staff was introduced to parents to provide a clear picture of their roles and ensuring parents that their child’s education is a priority. State mandates and regulations are discussed in a general meeting and the structure, goals, and methods of instruction employed by the ENL and bilingual teachers is thoroughly explained to all parents of children involved in such programs. Classrooms are opened to the parents so that they may view the curriculum in practice. Parents are encouraged to make appointments with the teacher if they wish further information. Oral and written translations for non-English parents are available for all communications and during all meetings. The Parent Coordinator avails herself to all parents in the morning during arrival and in the afternoon during dismissal; on Tuesday afternoons during Parent Engagement time; via the Remind app; and at all scheduled meetings. Parent Support Services will be provided to all ENL parents but in particular to our Chinese-speaking parents by our Chinese Bilingual Guidance Counselor. She will meet with parents individually and in groups. They will receive guidance and referral services to community based organizations. Children in the after school CAPA program will receive extra support to supplement instruction given during regular school hours. In an effort to build parent language independence and foster cultural awareness, our Parent Coordinator will lead weekly adult ENL classes. Participants receive a Side By Side textbook and workbook to use during instruction and for review at home throughout the duration of the ENL class. Cycles of parents will be rotated through sessions of this class so that all who express interest are able to participate. Lastly, our Parent Coordinator is facilitating Learning Leaders training so that parent volunteers can assist with classroom instruction. Our Bilingual Learning Leaders can thus provide translation and academic enrichment to our English Language Learners. Attendance records will be maintained by collecting daily attendance from all ENL classes, parent workshops, and training sessions. All program applications, letters, attendance outreach, and handouts will be documented/dispersed in the parents' preferred language. 2 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name P.S. 120 Q Borough Queens School Number 120 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Robert Marino Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Alicia Marcinkowski Teacher/Subject Area Heilin (Vicky) Hong, Bilingual Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Danielle DiMango Assistant Principal Jacqueline Momoh Coach N/A School Counselor XiuMei (Mimi) Zhu Parent Frank Chow Parent Coordinator Fangye Plastock-Zhou Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Vasiliou-Rozos Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 14 0 11 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 17 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 0 D. Student Demographics 4  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 982 Total number of ELLs 461 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 46.95% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Mandarin If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE TBE TBE Lang. School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2018-2019 2016-2017 2017-2018 K 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 2 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 1 DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 5 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 1 1 0 0 0 4 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? After administration of the NYSITELL, we use Fountas and Pinnell running records as well as Reading Street assessments to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. We combine this data with other formative assessments such as letter-sound awareness inventories, informal running records, conference notes, and teacher made assessments. The data collected on the early literacy skills of our ELLs displays that most new admits (new to the DOE, not transfers from within) are entering the school with little to no English proficiency. For example, of the new K-5 students registered from September 2017 to June 2018, the majority tested on Entering or Emerging levels of the NYSITELL, with only 12% scoring Commanding proficiency. Our entering Kindergarteners, however, due to the growth of Pre-K For All programs in recent years, arrive with a range of English proficiency levels; even those who speak little to no English often demonstrate some Listening comprehension, as they have 5  been exposed to at least social English in Pre-K. Forty-five percent of Kindergarteners (2018) scored Entering or Emerging and thirty-nine percent scored Transitioning or Expanding (an increase of intermediate scores when compared to previous years). Fifteen percent scored at the Commanding level, indicating an acquisition of English language either by attending pre-school in the U.S. or bilingual education in their home country. Although all of our Kindergarten classes are programmed to receive at least 360 minutes of ENL instruction, we use the above-mentioned sources of early literacy data to differentiate instruction when we form small groups within each classroom. Students entering our school in the upper grades are fully programmed to receive ENL minutes of service, and when it is not possible to program them in self-contained TESOL classes, we form small push-in/pull-out groups with ENL teachers to provide these students with the English literacy support they require. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Since we began to revamp our ENL department in September 2015, we have put several structures in place to analyze ELL assessment data and provide support for our English Language Learners. - Grade-wide Inquiry teams analyze literacy assessments, focusing on subgroups of ELLs when implementing and measuring the impact of targeted instructional strategies. - In addition to grade-wide Inquiry teams, an ELL Inquiry team was formed in December 2016 to analyze schoolwide ELL data trends and inform programming decisions. The ELL Inquiry team used the EDAT tool to analyze data, focus on subgroups of ELLs, and identify English Language Learners with high at-risk levels to provide increased instructional and socio-emotional support. - Our ENL department has been growing each year as we hire TESOL-licensed (and often dually-licensed) teachers. In September 2015, we had only one full-time push-in/pull-out teacher; looking ahead to 2018-2019, we have four full-time push-in/pull-out teachers. In addition, we look to build capacity within our classroom and cluster teachers by hiring dually-licensed (Childhood or Common Branches as well as TESOL) professionals. In addition, we currently have three staff members (classroom teachers) who are pursuing TESOL extensions. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ELL program in several ways. Each summer, we look at end-of-year data which include the NYSESLAT, NYS ELA and Math exams to see if we met AYP. From this data we also learn about students’ strengths and weaknesses, and design our programming to meet those needs. We use the EDAT tool to analyze the impact of various instructional strategies as well as participation in Title III supplemental programs such as our Saturday Arts & Language program. Throughout the year, we look at classroom instruction and our curricular units of study to see the extent to which ELLs are immersed in the CCLS with scaffolds provided by Reading Street and GOMath programs! Unit assessments and performance tasks allow us to frequently measure ELLs’ performance. During Inquiry meetings, teacher teams analyze data and student work across their grades, and measure the impact of various instructional strategies. Through this feedback cycle we ask the following questions, asking teachers to reflect specifically: What went well? (i.e., how did this strategy impact student achievement?) What would be even better? What should we try next, and why? 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? As NYSESLAT results become available each summer, we use the EDAT tool to analyze how many students advanced proficiency levels, how many stalled at their current level, and (regrettably) how many slid backwards. We use this information, as well as the at-risk levels generated, to plan which students require more support. In May 2017, our ELL Inquiry team piloted a new tool in which teachers can plan to identify and implement interventions for at-risk English Language Learners. Similar to an IEP document, the "ELL IEP" provides important data points and lists a drop-down menu for teachers to identify targeted strategies. These menus include options to support students with instructional strategies, grouping, parent outreach, and supplemental programs. As we roll out the "ELL IEPs" in full starting September 2018, combined with more robust AIS programs, we hope that these documents serve as effective records of our work to support our neediest English Language Learners. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6  Based on the NYSITELL/NYSESLAT, all ELLs are programmed to receive at least the minimum number of minutes per week of ENL service as outlined in CR-Part 154. All students (Tier I) are serviced with mandatory pull-out and push-in minutes with a certified TESOL instructor. Students who need more support (Tier II), as evidenced by literacy data such as running records and Reading Street assessments, receive more targeted support in before- or after-school programs, Title III Saturday Arts (or Family English) programs, and with our TESOL cluster teachers during Morning Meeting. Finally, our neediest students (longer term ELLs such as those in 3rd-5th grade still performing at Entering/Emerging levels; frequently these are students with IEPs as well) receive frequent small group support and will be tracked through our "ELL IEPs." 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. With the EDAT tool, we can analyze student growth on the NYSESLAT, and look at trends in terms of modalities of strength and need. We can also identify subgroups of students by comparing their NYSESLAT and ELA results (students in Grades 3-5) and at-risk levels. Grade-level Inquiry teams as well as our ELL Inquiry team use this summative data in addition to formative assessment records to evaluate the impact of existing programs and brainstorm possible strategies for the future. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? School-wide data is shared with staff members through Inquiry teams. The Core Inquiry team meets bi-monthly, the ELL Inquiry team meets monthly, and grade-level Inquiry teams meet weekly. Inquiry protocols such as "Here's What, So What, Now What" are used to evaluate the impact of various instructional strategies/programs and identify areas of growth for the future. Additionally, at P.S. 120 we incorporate the results from staff and student surveys when identifying adjustments to make to our programs. During Integrated instruction, ENL teachers use data and informal assessments to create purposeful groups targeting specific skills. During Stand-Alone instruction, teachers are able to use date to drive small group instruction in literacy. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In our Freestanding ENL program, PS 120 offers two models of instruction, Self-Contained classrooms and Push-In/Pull-Out services. We have 1-3 Self-Contained classrooms on each grade level, and take care to program a mix of ELLs and non-ELLs heterogeneously when forming these classes, as we know students benefit from flexible grouping and learning from language buddies on a range of English proficiency levels from Entering to Commanding. Students in our Self-Contained classrooms receive their Stand-Alone ENL minutes during ELA lessons, and their Integrated minutes during all other content areas. ELLs who are not programmed in Self-Contained classes receive their Stand-Alone and Integrated ENL minutes through a combination of instruction from content-area Cluster teachers, or ENL Push-In/Pull-Out services (see Question 2 below for more information). Cluster teachers providing integrated minutes are dually certified with TESOL and CB/content licenses. These teachers provide 45 minutes of Integrated ENL each period as they teach students their content area through ESL strategies. Students travel as a block to Cluster teachers, such as STEAM, and are heterogeneously grouped. Push-In ENL teachers have TESOL licenses and they co-teach with classroom teachers (primarily during ELA but sometimes also in Math, Science and Social Studies) to deliver Integrated ENL minutes. Finally, Pull-Out ESL teachers have TESOL licenses and they pull groups of students to deliver Stand-Alone ENL minutes. b. TBE program. If applicable. 7  In 2018-2019 we will have three Bilingual Kindergarten classes (one a Bilingual 12:1:1 class), made up of a heterogeneous group of students whose parents selected TBE on their Parent Survey and Program Selection form. During Kindergarten registration in the spring, parents indicate students' English and home language proficiency on the HLIS, as well as their preschool placement. We consider students' PreK experiences, NYSITELL results, and parent choice forms when programming our TBE Kindergarten classes. Our TBE program incorporates the use of the home language (Mandarin) in all content areas; students are not programmed to use one language exclusively for some subjects and one language for others. Rather, the teacher's goal is to use the home language as often as possible to aid comprehension, and to transition to English as students are ready. At the beginning of the year, the TBE class is conducted at least 75% in Chinese. Towards the middle of the year, students are speaking approximately 50% in Chinese and 50% in English. By the end of the school year, students are speaking English 75-100% of the time, although they may rely on Chinese as necessary (about 25% of the time) for clarification and support. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL coordinator ensures that the mandated number of Stand-Alone and Integrated ENL minutes are provided in each program. Students who have not yet achieved Commanding proficiency on the NYSESLAT are placed when possible in a Self-Contained classroom with a dual licensed ENL/Common Branches teacher for the whole day. Students in our Self-Contained ENL classrooms receive their Stand-Alone ENL minutes during ELA lessons, and their Integrated minutes during all other content areas. We have between one and three Self-Contained classrooms on each grade from Kindergarten to 5th grade. We make an effort to program our Self-Contained classrooms homogeneously, including students with higher English proficiency levels in each class to serve as strong language models. All Kindergarten classes are programmed to receive 360 minutes of ENL services to support the heterogeneous groupings and to provide early literacy support to every child. Push-In, Pull-Out, Morning Meeting and Cluster periods provide ENL minutes to ELLs who are not placed in Self-Contained classes. Some of these ELLs are programmed in ICT or 12:1:1 classes (Kindergarten-5th grade) because of services mandated on their IEP; these students require a unique program due to the combination of language needs, IEP requirements, necessary scaffolding for comprehension, and related services. To support these students, many of whom require 360 minutes weekly even after several years of ENL services, ENL teachers push-in and co-teach with the ICT teachers (to deliver Integrated ENL minutes) or form ungraded or "bridge" pull-out groups with ICT/12:1:1 students across 2-3 grades (to deliver Stand-Alone ENL minutes). The other group of students who receive integrated minutes of instruction are those who scored Commanding/Proficient on the NYSESLAT in 2017 or 2018. These students have been programmed in classes with former ELLs or students who speak no language other than English (OTELE = NO). They require 90 minutes of Integrated ENL weekly to support their transition out of ENL (for two years after having passed the NYSESLAT). These classes are serviced by a Push-In ENL teacher who co-teaches with the classroom teacher. Lastly, we have two Cluster teachers who are dually certified with TESOL and CB/content. These teachers provide 45 minutes of Integrated ENL each Cluster period, and for 25 minutes daily during Morning Meeting as they teach students content through ENL strategies. Our students receive their home language support through the use of home language books, glossaries, dictionaries, and linguistic pairing/grouping. Since September 2017, teachers have attended TBE/DL training each month to gain additional resources and knowledge they can use to guide their instruction. In Math, concepts are first taught in Chinese, and then in English. Teachers build upon students' prior knowledge of vocabulary words in Chinese during Social Studies instruction. They use this foundation to grow students' English vocabulary. Teachers encourage students who speak two languages to translate information whenever possible. Teachers who speak the student’s native language also use the first language to support the second. Our Kindergarten Chinese Transitional Bilingual classrooms provide students with their mandated minutes by having a licensed Bilingual teacher provide instruction in Chinese and English the entire day. Initially, the students receive 75% of instruction in their home language and 25% in English. As the student’s English proficiency increases, more time is spent teaching the students in English. Midyear there is a 50% split between English and the home language. By the spring, English is taught 75% of the time and the home language for the remaining 25%. 8  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content areas are delivered in each program model by using the six types of scaffolding techniques which include modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text re-presentation, and metacognition. Teachers at P.S. 120 use these techniques in the following ways. When modeling, our teachers demonstrate what they want the student to do first, using Total Physical Response (TPR) with Entering/Emerging level students, or they complete the task together so that students know the expectations and have an opportunity to rehearse/practice language about the task in advance. When teachers use bridging as a technique, they allow students to access their prior knowledge in order to make a connection to the current lesson. Students may share through discussion (English or the home language), drawings, or a brainstorming Thinking Map such as a circle map. Through contextualization, our teachers provide visual support that the students can understand when solely printed text does not give enough information. Bridging and contextualization are both forms of schema building, which is a building on of knowledge that is critical when learning about a new concept. Our teachers allow students to preview information by using graphic organizers (or Thinking Maps) to gather information in pieces in order to understand the whole. When using text re-presentation, students get an opportunity to use academic language by presenting concepts in another fashion, either orally or in written form. Lastly, our teachers show the students how to use metacognition by modeling think-alouds to teach them multiple strategies that they can apply when performing a task. Questioning, establishing a process/procedure, reflection, and self-assessment are all forms of metacognition that teachers can help students develop ("learning about learning"). Teachers can strengthen their own metacognition through study and practice with the Danielson Framework for Teaching, which indicates that highly effective classrooms feature reflective, process-oriented work and authentic discussion. Since the last LAP submission, P.S. 120 teachers continue to expand their practice and provide more scaffolds for ELLs through the use of Thinking Maps and Power Paragraphing, instructional strategies/frameworks which help ELLs become better writers. Additionally, Mary Ann Cucchiara's workshops in 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 provided several cohorts of ENL teachers with the latest strategies that help support language development for the CCLS. The strategies include juicy sentences, deconstruct/reconstruct, conversation frames for cause and effect, paragraph frames for summarizing chapters, and academic language frames to add tier three and four words when writing and speaking. These strategies are implemented through the use of complex and compelling texts related to each core content area. In 2017-2018, we had two Peer Collaborative Teachers (both TESOL-certified) who worked to build capacity with the Cucchiara strategies by training 3rd and 4th grade teachers. In 2018-2019, these same PCTs will continue as instructional leaders, along with additional PCTs and Model Teachers who will focus on supporting instruction on all grade levels. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Research shows that the stronger a student's proficiency in his/her home language, the more easily concepts transfer to new (English) language proficiency. For this reason we want to emphasize the importance of building and retaining students' home language proficiency while they are developing English language acquisition. We ensure that all ELLs are appropriately evaluated throughout the year by giving them the option of taking the mathematics or science state exams in their home language. We also distribute glossaries in various languages in order for students to understand all exam questions. In our Kindergarten Chinese bilingual classes, we informally assess to determine the students' strengths in their native language by using running records, end of unit assessments in math, individual conferences, CCLS-aligned performance assessments in reading and math, small group instruction, and guided reading groups. 1 st -5th grade students in our Self-Contained classes have the option of taking end-of-unit Math exams in their home language as well. Through our curriculum as well as parent workshops, we want to emphasize the importance of reading, writing, speaking and listening in students' home languages at their families for holistic literacy development. In addition, Title III supplemental programs such as the P.S. 120 Saturday Arts & Language program and FACE's Family English highlight and reinforce students' home language while building English language proficiency. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer 9  c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We differentiate instruction for ELL subgroups through the following programs and strategies: a. Whether students are formally labeled as SIFE students or not (i.e., in grade 3 or above, scoring Entering/Emerging, administered the LENS), we make every effort to learn about students' academic history at registration, and informing the classroom teacher if a student has had interrupted formal education. The child is then afforded all the services that a Long Term ELL would receive, which includes the Saturday Arts & Language program or Family English, and small group instruction. The student is also taught in their home language, where applicable. We understand that a SIFE student can have intensive social and emotional needs. They can show withdrawal or display aggressive behavior in the classroom. Therefore, we provide guidance services to help the student get adjusted to his/her new environment. b. In addition to their 360 mandated minutes, we offer the newcomers arriving with Entering/Emerging proficiency a beginner placement in one of our Self-Contained classrooms, which have dually-licensed teachers, smaller class rosters and the support of an additional teacher/para when possible. Content instruction is supplemented with texts/materials in the students' home languages, and an emphasis is placed on helping students learn important social phrases to communicate their likes, wants and needs. The program helps Entering and Emerging students achieve basic interpersonal communication skills (BICS) before moving on with academic language. c. At P.S. 120 we do everything possible to prevent Long Term ELLs (LTE). We are working on ways to improve how we teach ELLs in years 4-6 by considering new programs aimed at improving ELLs at risk for reading problems. Through the Response to Intervention program (RTI), the Pupil Personal Team (PPT) discusses students who are struggling in academic or behavioral areas to find what startegies or interventions can be implemented. The team will then devise a plan to provide services which may include at risk speech, SETSS or counseling which will be delivered for a specified period of time. Additionally, our Library teacher pulls small groups of students in need of guided reading, LLI, or phonics instruction through Wilson. Our grade-level and ELL Inquiry teams use the EDAT tool to analyze at-risk English Language Learners and identify supports to prevent students from becoming Long Term ELLs. d. Our plan to service long-term ELLs are as follows. First we look at data including the NYSESLAT, ELA, and unit assessments to find the students' weaknesses. We will invite them to all Title III activities which will promote language acquisition. They will be included in small group instruction. Currently, the majority of our long-term ELLs are students with IEPs who typically have language processing issues in both the home language and English. Small groups and scaffolded supports are outlined in their IEPs to provide the best plan of action to address these students' individual needs. ENL teachers will create an "ELL IEP" for English Language Learners in general education who demonstrate at-risk indicators. e. Our plan to service former ELLs is to continue to include them in all Title III programs in years 1 and 2 after testing Commanding/Proficient. They receive 90 minutes in Integrated ENL minutes as well as testing accommodations for two full years after passing the NYSESLAT. Our upper-grade Push-In teachers co-teach with these students' classroom teachers to support their language needs through the transition out of ENL. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? P.S. 120 strives to meet the needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. In order to meet the needs of grade level curriculum we look at students' IEPs, focusing on their present levels of performance and goals in order to understand their diverse needs. By understanding that all students learn differently we can assess which learning style hones in on their particular strengths and develop lessons that cater to them. In 2009-2010 we formed a Kindergarten integrated co-teaching classroom in which our ELL-SWDs could be instructed within a general education classroom alongside their peers without IEPs. Seeing that this setting produced positive results in the academic and language growth of our ELL-SWDs, we then formed an additional Kindergarten ICT classroom and a first grade in 2010-2011. In the school year of 2011-2012 we continued to grow our ICT classes by not only continuing in grade one and two, but adding a third and fourth grade class. We continued to grow our ICT program in the 2012-2013 school year by having ICT clasess in grades 2 through 5 and Kindergarten. Between 2013-2015, we had ICT classes in Kindergarten and first grade as well as grades 3 through 5. In recent school years (since September 2015), we have ICT classrooms on every grade level (Kindergarten-5th), as well as Self-Contained bridge classes serving a small group of students (12:1:1) on adjoining grade levels by tailoring instruction using the CCLS as appropriate for each child's IEP goals. Our ENL push-in/pull-out teachers work with children in each of these classrooms to ensure that they receive all of 0  their entitled minutes of ENL service. Teachers in Kindergarten through Grade 3 use Reading Street to deliver literacy instruction. The Reading Street English Language Learners Handbook, Reteach Book, and ELL Readers provide scaffolds for students in Reading, Writing, Listening, and Speaking. Progress monitoring allows teachers to identify students' needs and make grouping decisions. Additionally, Kindergarten teachers use Fundations to accelerate English language development for ELL-SWDs. Grade 4 and 5 teachers are currently revising their ELA units to include more Social Studies content and use the framework of Maryann Cucchiara's strategies to promote comprehension of complex text. For Math instruction, teachers use Go Math and Algebra for All to align instruction in order to meet individual students' IEP goals. Lastly, Passport to Social Studies provides upper grade students with rich content knowledge. ENL teachers provide extra support, background knowledge, and visuals in order for ELL-SWDs to succeed. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school achieves IEP and English proficiency goals for ELL-SWDs by providing the following support: Curricular- Depending on the student's needs, there is room for modifications. Teachers can teach at a slower pace and revisit lessons the next day if students do not succeed at the first attempt. They can modify the curriculum depending on each student's success. Teachers can use high-interest trade books that are on the student’s level to reach goals such as retelling stories or identifying the main idea of a non-fiction passage. Instructional- Teachers meet with students 1:1 and in small groups. The teacher changes the instructional strategies and simplifies/modifies them in order to achieve the same intended outcomes. For example, pictorial support, modifying the amount of input/prompting given to students, adapted text, and extended teaching time for certain concepts. The classrooms are equipped with SMART boards. This technology helps students answer questions by supporting them with pictures, words, video clips, and oral presentations. Scheduling- During the winter/spring, we anticipate offering a before-school program to teach ELLs and ELL-SWD’s in small groups. They will focus on close reading and increasing academic vocabulary. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs are supported in small groups in all subject areas by their Self-Contained classroom teacher or Push-In/Pull-Out ENL teachers. When Self-Contained classroom teachers are delivering ELA instruction, students receive Stand-Alone ENL minutes, and for all other content areas they receive Integrated ENL minutes. Push-In ENL teachers co-teach with classroom teachers to deliver Integrated ENL minutes, and Pull-Out ENL teachers pull groups of ELLs for Stand-Alone ENL instruction. During Morning Meeting time, ENL teachers integrate content areas and literacy by using vocabulary strategies, read alouds, writing, and TPR. Whenever possible, teachers at PS 120 incorporate learning materials in the students' home languages to reinforce concepts taught in English; these materials include Bilingual textbooks/workbooks, trade books, glossaries and dictionaries. Additionally, our Cluster teachers provide instruction in other subjects such as Science, Music, Visual Arts, and Physical Education. Along with classroom teachers, all cluster teachers receive PD focused on English Language Learners to incorporate ENL strategies in their content-based instruction. In addition, teachers are being trained to use Response to Intervention (RTI). This will enable teachers to identify students who are struggling in school and use targeted teaching to help them catch up. Universal screening assessments, such as Fountas and Pinnell, NYS Exam Data Grades 3-5, Go Math Unit Assessments, Reading Street Unit Assessments, and STAR Assessments will be used to identify which students are on track and which students are not. All core content area teachers will monitor students who are not on track weekly to monthly. To ensure that all students receive the support they need, teachers use Tier I interventions for all students (Core Classroom Instruction), Tier 2 interventions for students requiring additional support (Targeted Small Group Instruction), and Tier 3 interventions for the few students who need intensive instructional support. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 1  We plan to renew our ENL professional development with Mary Ann Cucchiara to revisit and add the latest strategies to support language development for the CCLS. We also plan to focus on close reading, as applicable for each grade level, to help students interact with and question the grade level texts they read. We will continue our work with UbD curriculum revision, particularly on our Writing units, as we feel the writing component within Reading Street is lacking. Our 2017 NYSESLAT scores as well as results of the state ELA exam indicate that our students need more support with the writing process. We plan to continue teaching Power Paragraphing as a framework to support ELLs (and all students!) in writing. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. This year we have two after school programs in the building, one run by CAPA (Chinese American Parent Association) and a similar club-based model run by PS 120 teachers. Both programs are open to ELLs as well as non-ELLs, and include homework help, outdoor play, and arts/crafts. Our Title III programs are for our ELLs to participate in and acquire English proficiency. In 2018-2019 we anticipate continuing our Saturday Arts & Language program, as well as our partnership with FACE's Family English program, for entitled students in Kindergarten-5th grade. The programs focus on vocabulary development through core content area subjects as aligned with the Common Core standards, and reinforce home language development as well. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. During ELA, ELLs are supported through the Reading Street program, which includes videos, flashcards, big books, workbooks, and phonics instruction to aid comprehension in all four modalities. Some teachers who are trained in Teachers College Reading and Writing Project incorporate writing process lessons into the ELA curriculum to help strengthen ELLs' pre-writing and writing. Our Math program is GOMath!, which supports ELLs with visual aids, videos, workbooks, and holistic performance tasks. Science content is delivered both in the classroom and with Science Cluster teachers, who will use the new Amplify Science curriculum as well as inquiry-based STEM projects. In terms of educational technology, we continue to purchase Smart Boards and install them in classrooms with ELLs in grades Kindergarten through 5. The Smart Boards provide access to the Internet in order for teachers to scaffold strategies like modeling and contextualizing. Classroom libraries are regularly replenished with appropriate reading level books in all ELL classrooms. Students are provided with glossaries in their native language for content study. We also purchased trade books in multiple languages to encourage and support newcomers. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our teachers use home language support whenever possible. In our Chinese Transitional Bilingual program native language support is delivered by teaching the students in their native language up to 75 percent of the time (at the beginning of the school year). The students are encouraged and expected to use their first language in their production of work. In our ENL program, we have students assist newcomers who speak the same language. We provide trade books in various home languages, dictionaries, and glossaries. We also have a bilingual Chinese guidance counselor, school psychologist, and social worker, all of whom help the ELLs with emotional or behavioral problems. We have several Bilingual pedagogues and paraprofessionals who assist teachers, when asked, to communicate specific instructions to the students. Our parent coordinator is Bilingual Chinese/English and also helps disseminate information to the students and parents. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Upon arrival, newly registered ELLs are placed in the appropriate grade according to their age. The student's language level determines the services, support and resources he/she will receive. After assessing reading and writing levels, appropriate materials, such as leveled books, are provided to the student, and differentiated instruction is utilized by the classroom teacher. In the classroom the students are provided with books in their home language so that their home language reading skills continue to be fostered. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 120 is not co-located. 2  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). P.S. 120 strives to welcome newcomer ELLs when they enter the school at various points in the year. We try to establish an immediate connection with students through initial and extended interviews accompanying the HLIS form. Our pupil secretary, parent coordinator (Fangye Plastock-Zhao), ENL coordinator (Jacqueline Momoh), and TESOL-licensed teachers meet the families and welcome the students. During the NYSITELL/Spanish LAB administration, students are introduced to pedagogues who speak the same home language whenever possible. Another activity that helps the newcomer feel welcomed is introducing the child to staff members who speak the same language as well. It is our hope that the child will understand that if they need to communicate in an urgent manner, there are people here to assist them. All students receive a contact sheet with the names and pictures of school administrators, the parent coordinator, and guidance counselor, so they know who they can speak with. These contact sheets are stapled into students' planners and referenced throughout the year. Finally, our ENL classrooms are filled with home language books and Bilingual dictionaries/glossaries, which help newcomers feel comfortable as they get accustomed to their new school environment. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? No language electives are offered at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? No dual language programs are offered at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Part of our professional development series for all teachers involves looking closely at the Danielson Framework for Teaching and improving our instruction to better support student learning through components 3B, 3C, and 3D. Curriculum revision will continue as grade-level and department teams tweak their UbD units ot study. 2017-2018 was our school's first year using RULER in an effort to increase the social/emotional intelligence of our school community. This new initiative supported ELLs' language acquisition by providing the vocabulary and linguistic frames they need to express themselves. 2018-2019 will be the second year of our RULER roll-out. We also plan to provide professional development on research-based instructional strategies/frameworks such as the work of Mary Ann Cucchiara and Power Paragraphing. This year, professional development will be completed in an 8-week cycle consisting of four different ELL-related topics. Teachers attending each PD are grouped by grade level: Kindergarten and Grade 1 Teachers, Grades 2 and 3 Teachers, Grades 4 and 5 Teachers, and Cluster Teachers. Each group will receive professional development on the same topic for two consecutive weeks until they have received all four PDs. The school administration is providing professional development on Aligning Rubrics. Aligning rubrics will ensure that our ELLs are meeting grade-level standards, and teachers will use these rubrics to assess their students to guide instruction. Our Model Teacher, a Self-Contained Special Education Teacher, is presenting Differentiation Strategies. Teachers will be able to implement these strategies in their instruction to meet the needs of all students in their classes, ranging from the Entering to Commanding levels. One of our Peer Collaborative Teachers, an ENL certified ELA Teacher, is presenting Power Paragraphing. Since many of our ELLs struggle with writing, this technique can be used to help students organize their writing, provide details, and include transition words. Finally, our second Peer 3  Collaborative Teacher, an ENL Push-In/Pull-Out Teacher, is presenting ENL Strategies based on the work of Mary Ann Cucchiara. Using framed motivations, word play strategies, close reading, juicy sentences, and differentiated tasks will build the academic language of our ELL students. Paraprofessionals meet weekly to read professional articles on topics such as supporting the language and speech needs of ELL-SWDs. Group discussion provides the staff with the opportunity to share best practices with colleagues. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Because so many of our students are former ELLs, if not ELLS currently receiving ENL minutes of service, we plan professional development as if every teacher is an ENL teacher. We find that the instructional strategies that benefit ELLs are also effective with students whose home language is English, and Students with Disabilities. In this way, we exceed the requirement of providing ELL-specific professional development for our staff as a whole, and when necessary we program breakout groups or small-group Inquiry teams to research strategies or analyze data specific to our English Language Learners. As stated in Question 1, all teachers will receive professional development on Aligning Rubrics, Differentiation Strategies, Power Paragraphing, and ENL Strategies. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? As mandated by CR-Part 154, all ELLs are entitled to at least one extra meeting with parents during the year in addition to Parent-Teacher-Conferences. At this time, Self-Contained classroom teachers, Push-In/Pull-Out and ENL Cluster teachers will work together to assemble individual assessment results for each student. Teachers will explain how they use information from multiple data sources, including formative and summative assessments, to strategically align and tailor curriculum, lessons, and instruction to the unique needs of individual students. Additionally, teachers in Grades 1-5 will discuss last year's NYSESLAT data with each individual parent. The teachers will discuss next steps in order to meet each student's individual goal and to improve English language proficiency. Additionally, content area teachers will share strategies used in class and online resources that parents and students can access to encourage learning at home. We also review the structure of our ENL program with families, as requirements of ENL minutes changed with the revisions of CR-Part 154. During our ENL orientations and subsequent meetings, we explain how students in Self Contained ESL classrooms receive Stand-Alone ENL minutes during ELA instruction, and Integrated ENL minutes in all other content areas; Pull-Out ENL teachers deliver Stand-Alone ENL minutes by pulling groups out of the classroom; and Push-In ENL teachers deliver Integrated ENL minutes by co-teaching content areas (primarily ELA but at times Math, Science, and Social Studies) with the classroom teacher. All of this information will be shared with families in their preferred language of communication. We will utilize Bilingual pedagogues/paraprofessionals/school aides, our Parent Coordinator, and over-the-phone interpretation services as necessary to translate. We anticipate these meetings will continue to occur during our Tuesday afternoon parent outreach time. Parents will have the opportunity to ask questions, express concerns, and voice their ideas to best support our ELLs. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. As our Parent Coordinator is a Bilingual Chinese-English speaker and is an integral part of the registration process, she establishes an immediate connection with families and collects both formal and informal data about their needs. At Meet the Teacher night this year, she distributed the Parents' Bill of Rights and collected a parent survey about families needs' and preferences for school involvement. ELL families are supported along with every PS 120 family because all of our outreach is translated into Chinese and Spanish. As requested, we also provide translations in the 10 DOE languages, as well as use stamps/over-the-phone interpreters for lower-incident languages. 4  Family English was an addition to our ELL parent outreach in the spring of 2016. This unique program has continued with much success into the summer of 2018, and we look forward to pursuing a lasting partnership by hosting FACE's Family English at P.S. 120. Throughout the year, we plan to schedule workshops to support parents of ELLs as they learn about the Common Core Standards and our curricula. Our school guidance counselors and Parent Coordinator have organized Family Night - Introduction to RULER. Parents will be introduced to RULER, a new school initiative, to increase social/emotional intelligence. Families will create their own Charters, and gain information about socio-emotional topics so that parents and guardians know how they can best support their children at home. In addition, a member of the Child Center of NY has a home base in our school. Her goal is to strengthen children and families with skills, opportunities, and emotional support to build healthy, successful lives. The program helps families love and support each other, work through trauma, and connect to warm, caring people. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Robert Marino, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 120Q School DBN: 25Q120 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Robert Marino Title Principal Jacqueline Momoh Assistant Principal Fangye Plastock-Zhao Parent Coordinator Alicia Marcinkowski ENL/Bilingual Teacher Frank Chow Parent Heilin (Vicky) Hong, Bilingual Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Xiumei (Mimi) Zhu School Counselor Danielle DiMango Maria Vasiliou-Rozos Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/28/2018 6/28/2018 6/28/2018 6/28/2018 6/28/2018 6/28/2018 6/28/2018 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q120 School Name: P.S. 120Q Superintendent: D. Dimango The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jacqueline Momoh Assistant Principal, ENL Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 120 determines the language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication by assessing the data from multiple sources. Our school compiles information from ATS reports such as RHLA, RPOB, and RCPL to ensure that information is delivered in parents’ preferred languages. 69% of families prefer communication in Chinese (Mandarin, Cantonese, or other Chinese dialects), 23% prefer English, 7% prefer Spanish, and the remainder named lower-incidence languages. Parent information is provided in a variety of languages. All school events are supported by staff members who speak English, Chinese, and/or Spanish. Report cards and other important documents are distributed in these languages as well. A school stamp is used on important letters informing parents (in English, Chinese and Spanish) stating that the provided information must be translated. Translators are made available for all school functions 8  including Parent-Teacher Conferences, evening performances, parent workshops, and Parents’ Association meetings. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral (Data from RCPL, 6/27/18, of 1036 parents responding) Our data indicates that Chinese and Spanish represent our highest translation and oral interpretation needs. Ongoing parent meetings, as well as written communications, inform parents that oral and written translation services are available. This is highly publicized, especially as it relates to Parent-Teacher Conferences. Bengali Chinese Gujarati Hindi Korean Mandarin English Pashto Punjabi Spanish Urdu Ukrainian Vietnamese 2 706 0 2 1 0 235 3 1 78 3 0 5 0.19 68.15 0 0.19 0.1 0 22.68 0.29 0.1 7.53 0.29 0 0.48 2 670 0 2 1 34 238 3 1 77 3 0 5 0.19 64.67 0 0.19 0.1 3.28 22.97 0.29 0.1 7.43 0.29 0 0.48 9  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Beginning of year policies: - Welcome letter with school policies - Arrival procedures 9/5 - Dismissal policy and permission slip/contact information Information regarding Meet the Teacher Night 9/5 Mutt-i-grees Consent 9/5 Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not 0  Remind Group Message Permission 9/5 Emergency home contact cards 9/5; Revised 11/14 Media consent 9/5 After school applications TBD included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not 1  Dismissal Procedures 9/5 Gifted and Talented Information Session letter TBD Parent Newsletters ongoing Parent Teacher Conference notice and half day schedule TBD included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not 2  Holidays/Schools closed ongoing Parent Teacher Conference announcements 4x yearly, TBD 11/15, PTA Meetings ongoing Testing dates/memos ongoing included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not 3  Health awareness as needed for preventative care or in case of an outbreak as needed Title III programs: before school and after school Winter and Spring included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Meet the Teacher night mid-September Dads Take Your Child to School Day 10/16, 10/17 provide interpretation service(s)? P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the 4  Parent Teacher Conferences 4x yearly, TBD 11/15, Parent Association Events ongoing Curriculum/Instruction/Enrichment workshops for families ongoing teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff 5  Tuesday afternoon parent outreach weekly Guidance counselor calls to parents daily with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. P.S. 120 meets translation needs in part with the help of a diverse school staff. Several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. Over-the-phone interpreter services are utilized for lower-incidence languages. Written translation services, when not included in the DOE’s translated languages, are performed by school staff with the use of translation software. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, our school communicates with limited-English-proficient families in various ways. Our Parent Coordinator sends out messages to families through the Remind app in their home language. In addition, we have a school website with translation capability on which we post updates through our blog and Twitter. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. P.S. 120 administrators will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All teachers received brochures from the Language Access Kit to distribute to parents at Meet the Teacher Night. Teachers have been provided with translation and interpretation resources, which can be used for daily communication, during Parent Engagement time on Tuesday afternoons, and 6  during Parent-Teacher conferences. Such resources include NYC Department of Education’s Translation and Interpretation Unit over the phone translation services, and access to our Parent Coordinator and other bilingual staff members. Important documents that teachers send home with students are translated into various languages. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All parents of students at P.S. 120 receive the Parents’ Bill of Rights document just before Meet the Teacher night in mid-September. This informs families of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services, in addition to instructions on how to obtain such services. We have posted translated signage from our Language Access Kit throughout the school. Such places include the Main Office, Administrators’ offices, and the Parent Coordinator’s office. There are multilingual signs welcoming families into the building in the lobby near our main entrance. Also posted in the lobby on the first floor is the “Important Notice for Parents Regarding Language Assistance Services. It is posted in all languages represented by the student population. With the help of a diverse school staff, several of the teachers, paras, secretaries, and the Parent Coordinator speak either Chinese or Spanish. These staff members inform parents of the services available and help ensure that a language barrier does not prevent parents from reaching the school’s administrative offices. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At the beginning of the year, our Parent Coordinator collected a survey from families regarding how they would like to be involved in school life at P.S. 120. Each year, we hope to continue the trend with high parental involvement. Through inquiry cycles using surveys, as well as more informal sources of feedback, our aim is to continuously evaluate our services to parents to determine ways in which we could improve. 7 
