 30Q122 School Name: P.S. 122 MAMIE FAY Principal: ANNA APREA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS/MS 122 MAMIE FAY 30Q122 School Number (DBN): 343000010122 PreK-8 21-21 Ditmars Blvd. Astoria, NY 11105 718-721-6410 Phone Number: 718-726-0016 Fax: Anna Aprea aaprea@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Anna Aprea Noelia Nunez Email Address: MaryGeraghty,Co-Presidents Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Melissa Austin Not Applicable Not Applicable Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Not Applicable District Information Geographical District: 30 Dr. Philip A. Composto Superintendent: Community Superintendent – District 30 Superintendent’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North - 5 th Floor Long Island City, NY 11101 PCompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-391-8323 Phone Number: 718-391-6147 Fax:   Field Support Center (FSC) Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Long Island City, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8222 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Anna Aprea Noelia Nunez Mary Geraghty Michael Pasacarelli James Hartofilis *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dora Politidis Melissa Austin Barbara Le Beux Melissa Lee Musa Ali Shama Scott McGarvey MongkolThitithamasak Member/ Staff Member/Staff Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Mission Statement – Our collaborative school community will provide excellent, standards-driven curricula to all students. Students will achieve their full scholastic and social potential to become creative and critically-thinking life-long learners and productive global citizens.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 1. PS 122 Mamie Fay is located in a culturally diverse residential section of Astoria, Queens. We are a community school serving the needs of general education and gifted students, English language learners, and students with special needs in grades PreK–5. PS 122’s Academy for Intellectually Gifted and Talented students in grades K-8 features a rigorous and enriched curriculum with accelerated academic courses of study in Next Generation Standards Algebra, Living Environment Regents, and Foreign Language (Spanish). Our program of curricular subjects is aligned to Next Generation Standards and establishes a strong foundation of knowledge through challenging and stimulating activities to enhance student engagement and learning. Our standards-based science program is designed to use inquiry and discovery in an interdisciplinary curriculum. Technology is used throughout as a tool for building and analyzing a deep content base, and applying it in innovative ways. Recognizing the arts as an integral component in student achievement, our arts programs include vocal and instrumental music, visual arts, and dance courses. PS 122 has earned national recognition for high student achievement through their creative and academic endeavors in various areas, such as Project Citizen, original writings and project oriented competitions. We value our partnerships with supportive organizations, such as Teachers College, American Ballroom Theater, Noguchi Sculpture Park, The Little Orchestra Society, Brooklyn Academy of Music (BAM), Magic Box Productions, Alley Pond Environmental Center, Symphony Harmony, Teachers and Writers Collaborative, and Sports & Arts in Schools Foundation. We have met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in all measured areas and earned special recognition for High School Preparatory Courses. We will expand our participation in Algebra for All across all fifth grade classes and in the eighth grade Next Generation Standards Algebra course. We will expand our physical education program to support student health and wellness. All teachers are trained in Moved to Improve in order to meet state fitness mandates. As a dedicated school community of school leaders, talented teachers and staff, and hard-working, involved parents, we are committed to providing high-quality learning experiences aligned to Next Generation Standards in a supportive and nurturing environment. In this way we can prepare all students for success in a changing world and help them set goals to maximize their potential. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2. Students with disabilities is a population that needs our focus for improved student learning. Analysis of the data reveals the number of students with an Individualized Education Program (IEP), especially in self-contained classes, who performed at levels 3 and 4 on NYS exams in ELA and math scored far below outcomes for other student sub-groups. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 3. This year we have made a great deal of progress in the Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools. We have made progress in Rigorous Instruction as evidenced by 4.22 score on the NYC School Survey 2017-2018 School Quality Survey. Our students achieved 79% at Levels 3 and 4 on the 2017-2018 NYS English Language Arts exam and achieved 77% at Levels 3 and 4 on the 2017-2018 NYS Mathematics exam. All 8th grade students were given the opportunity to take Regents coursework in Algebra 1, Living Environment, and New York City Second Language Proficiency (SLP) exam. All students who took these exams earned passing scores. Our school received a well developed rating in Strong Family-Community Ties on the NYC School Survey 2017-2018 Report. Scores in pertinent survey questions by parents, teachers and students increased from 2017 to 2018. Professional Collaborations increased as teacher teams continued their practice using an inquiry approach to promote shared leadership and focus on improved student learning. Many of our teachers have participated in professional development in reading, writing, math, science, 0  STEM, and addressing behavioral issues that interfere with learning. They have taken a leadership role in bringing that knowledge to colleagues in content areas and strategies for increased student achievement for all, including general education, gifted, English Language Learners (ELLs) and students with disabilities. A key area of focus for this school year is to support teachers and teacher teams to refine Rigorous Instruction, improve alignment of assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices to analyze information on student learning outcomes. We will strengthen the instructional core and incorporate professional development to support initiatives in Advanced Literacy Skills. In this way we can adjust instructional decisions and practices at the team and classroom levels. This is particularly important in supporting increased student learning for all students, especially for our students with disabilities and English Language Learners. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q122 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1361 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 23 23 10 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 6 N/A 15 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 53.0% % Attendance Rate 47.5% % Reduced Lunch 7.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 20.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 43.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.14 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 78.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 93% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 88 88 95.3% 5.6% 9.3% 5.0% 26.2% 5.2% 4 1% 7.5 76.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of the data in the 2017-2018 NYS Mathematics exam indicates that the percentages of students at levels 3 and 4 was 77% school wide. In 2018, students in grade 8 took the NYS Mathematics exam, along with the Algebra Regents. 99% of students who took the Algebra Regents passed. According to the 2017-2018 NYS Mathematics Exam, student performed very well in the areas of linear equations, equation word problems, and conversions. According to the 2017-2018 NYS Mathematics Exam, the areas of weakness are Numbers and Operations and Fractions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, math teacher teams in grades 3-5 will collaboratively develop rigorous, Next Generation Standards performance tasks to improve understanding of Operations and Algebraic Thinking as measured by an increase of 3% on the NYS Mathematics exam in math for students achieving performance levels 3 and 4. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students grades K-8 Research-based math curriculum in Go Math for K-5. Pearson enVisionmath accelerated program for Grades 6-7. Algebra for All in Grade 8, which includes differentiated activities for re-teach and acceleration. EngageNY is incorporated into all programs from K 8. Grade 8 is using CMP3 for enrichment. September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, building leaders Grade 5 teachers and grade 8 teacher will receive professional development to implement the Chancellor's initiative in Algebra for All to all classes in grades 5 and 8. Collaborative grade level planning sessions and inquiry teams will meet weekly to develop benchmark levels of proficiency, analyze data to identify student progress, patterns and trends in math. Professional Learning Committees will support regular assessments of student performances in Math. Inquiry teams will analyze formative data and student portfolios for target student populations to monitor progress at least quarterly (October, November, January, May), recommend instructional strategies for appropriately challenging tasks around differentiated instruction in problem-solving, deep conceptual understanding, application of understandings in new situations. Inter-visitations will provide opportunities to share best practices. Differentiated professional development, such as mentoring, observations, walk-throughs, participation in workshops, conferences, webinars, and study groups, will be provided to strengthen pedagogy, conceptual understanding, and the use of technology to improve student learning. 4 Students will be encouraged and supported to participate in school-based, national and international contests and affiliations. Students with disabilities, ENLs and former ENLs will be given the opportunities for re-teaching in small groups, peer-tutoring, and one-on-one tutoring during class time, after school, and enrichment period weekly. Students will participate September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, school leaders Students will be given the opportunity to participate in an after-school program sponsored by the Mayor’s Middle School Initiative grant to NY Edge for enrichment in various content and talent areas, including math and College and Career Readiness. Students in grades 6-8 September 2017-June 2018 School leaders, Educational Liaison in collaboration with CBO site director 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent outreach will provide increased home-school partnerships to improve student achievement. Parent workshops during the day and evening will be provided to support parent understanding of Next Generation Standards math standards, the use of technology and resources using math concepts and skills, strategies to support parents with English language acquisition and math concepts, and suggestions to help their children. Parent Coordinator, teachers, school leaders will provide family support from September 2018-June 2019. After school programs will be initiated for parents of immigrant children or limited English speaking parents who are looking to learn the English language so that they can further assist with their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School leaders, classroom teachers, math teachers will participate in instructional teams. Resources include NYC DOE and Queens North Borough Field and District 30 support staff. Teachers will use Go Math with Pearson accelerated edition for Grade 6 & 7, and Algebra 1 for grade 8, as well as web-based sites and supplementary resources. Classroom teachers and school leaders will participate in inquiry teams, supported by NYC DOE and Queens North Borough Field and District 30 staff. Classroom teachers and content specialists will participate in inter-visitations. Professional development will be provided by school staff, NYC DOE and District 30 support staff, affiliations through university and other partnerships. Teachers will provide support for enrichment activities through clubs and Mayor’s Middle School Initiative grant to NY Edge Sports and Arts in School Foundation. Parent outreach will be supported by school leaders, Parent Coordinator, teachers. Professional development will be provided during Mondays extended days and Tuesdays professional work time to support deepening conceptual understanding in math and improve student ability to verbalize their thinking behind the solution to problems. Teachers will be encouraged to visit Showcase Schools and turnkey best practices. The program schedule includes a weekly collaborative planning period during the day for all teachers. The middle school schedule includes one period weekly for club/enrichment, including opportunity for advanced math activities. The building of teacher capacity was facilitated by the development of 5  Professional Learning Committees that focused on topics such as STEM, Advanced Literacy, Computer Technology, Summative and Formative Assessments, Algebra for All, and Differentiated Instruction in the classroom. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 80% of students in grades 3-5 achieving performance levels 2 and 3 on the Go Math beginning of year assessment will show an improvement of at least 5% on the mid-year Go Math assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers will use Go Math Units aligned to Next Generation Standards to determine if students are on track to increase performance levels of at least 5 points across assessments. Teachers will conduct progress monitoring on a daily basis through formative assessments (Think-pair-share, exit slips, quizzes, etc.) In addition, the school will gather data from formative and summative assessments and analyze student work in order to drive instruction and assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? A review of the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, indicates positive response among teachers, parents, and students who feel that the school provides a safe and orderly environment for children. According to Spring 2017 NYS School Report Card, all sub-groups made AYP. However, review of the data of the 2017 NYS School Report Card indicates students with disabilities in grades 3-5 have made progress in closing the achievement gap but scored at levels 1 and 2 in greater numbers than other sub-groups. A review of item skills analysis, Periodic Assessment and student work products indicates a need for students to develop writing skills to improve English language understanding. Teacher teams engaged in inquiry identified a need for a more rigorous, structured writing program to improve writing skills. Teachers of SWD have been provided with professional development on parallel teaching, station learning, and small group instruction and how to assess their students to inform their instruction. In order for students with disabilities to access the curriculum the teacher looks to differentiate, provide scaffolding, and incorporate multiple entry points in teaching and learning. Teachers have been instructed on Wilson, Fountas and Pinnell, SPIRE, and guided reading to support students with disabilities. Teachers have met to discuss how to make ELA accessible and equitable for all students. The priority focus is to strengthen the instructional core through Advanced Literacy Skills initiative. A team has been formed that represents all student populations to make sure we can create an advanced literacy community that is equitable and accessible to all students. Students will be immersed in daily reading activities as well as accountable talk about texts. All students will be engaged in different writing activities for various purposes. All students will be engaged in various modes of discussion (debate, report, response, point of view, research, public speaking). All families will be informed of the school’s mission through notices, website, workshops in order to support Advanced Literacy Skills. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students with disabilities in grades 3-5 will demonstrate growth in the use of text-based evidence in informational writing as measured by the research-based Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) rubrics. Using data from the beginning of year assessments, all students will challenged through rigorous, well- developed instruction and supported by a collaborative team of teachers based on their needs. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school will conduct a needs assessment across all grades to determine baseline ELA proficiency for all populations and all subgroups to identify students’ instructional level, to inform instructional groups, to identify strengths and weaknesses. The school will continue to use a research-based writing program using Teachers College Units of Study. The Principal will participate in on-going professional development through the NYC DOE, Queens North Borough Field, District 30 support staff. Lead teachers will attend professional development sessions as well as visit Showcase Schools. To ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula instruction in ELA, teachers will receive professional development be able to use the instructional shifts to support advanced literacy skills. In order to continue to develop advanced literacy skills, teachers will continue to focus on Hallmark Four with the goal of using rich vocabulary in discussion and in written work. In addition, a Professional Learning Committee focused on Advanced Literacy will be formed to support instruction in the classroom. Teacher teams will meet monthly during grade level CPP to assess student writing and set instructional goals. Teams will meet to norm student work products and align expectations across the grade and vertically from one grade to another. Teams will meet for inquiry for instructional planning based on success in student proficiency and progress monitoring. Interventions include Foundations, Wilson, Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Intervention System kits and iReady. School leaders, teachers September 2018- October 2018 School Leaders, Grade leaders, teacher teams School leaders, teachers May 2018-June 2019 Principal, school leaders School leaders, teachers September 2018-June 2019 School leaders, lead teachers, Advanced Literacy Team School leaders, teachers September 2018-June 2019 School leaders, Advanced Literacy Team Teachers September 2018-June 2019 School leaders, lead teachers, Advanced Literacy Team Teachers, students September 2018-2019 Teachers, Teacher Teams Teachers will participate in professional learning activities to build capacity in gathering an analyzing data on student Teachers September 2018-2019 Principal, school leaders 8 writing, planning and implementing differentiated instruction for students with disabilities. Teachers will share best practices in teaching students with disabilities. Teachers September 2018-2019 Principal, school leaders Paraprofessionals will participate in professional learning activities in reading and writing strategies to provide instructional support for students with disabilities. Paraprofessionals September 2018-June 2019 Principal, school leaders Students will receive academic intervention using research-based materials, such as Wilson Double Dose for phonics, Great Leaps for fluency. SPIRE for phonemic awareness, small group instruction and other skills and understandings. Teachers, Paraprofessionals September 2018-2019 Principal, school leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will provide a culture of safe and inclusive environment to support the goals. The school community, including students, parents, and teachers will work collaboratively to reach the school goals. Parents will be invited in to learn about Advanced Literacy Skills and English language acquisition through workshops to help them improve their own literacy skills. We will also offer parents opportunities to participate in school wide events and classroom activities. Parent outreach will increase family engagement to provide understanding of learning goals and suggestions for parent support for their children in adoption of effective academic and personal behaviors, preparation for college and independent living, including SWD, ENL, and gifted students. Parent workshops will be provided by school leaders, lead teachers, and Parent Coordinator to strengthen parents’ understanding of learning goals toward improved student writing. Family events will be planned to engage parents to participate together with their children to improve English language skills in reading and writing for a variety of purposes from September 2018 – June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Principal and lead teachers will participate in professional development . Teachers will be using Teacher College Units of Study in Writing, Fundations, Wilson, Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Intervention System kits are supplementary instructional materials in addition to ReadyGen. Classroom teachers, special educators, service providers (SETSS, Speech teachers, Occupational Therapist, etc.) will meet in teacher teams for inquiry and instructional planning. Parent Coordinator and building leaders will facilitate family workshops and family activities. Professional development will be provided during Mondays extended days and Tuesday professional work extended days as well as weekly collaborative planning sessions during the school day. Teachers will be given time to plan collaboratively. Teacher time will be aligned with school goals. The teachers will engage all students in challenging literacy skills that allow them to fluent speakers, critical thinkers, present ideas argumentatively, make connections to real world application that impact students. Teachers will also receive professional development through Queens Field North. They will then turn-key information learned at these sessions to teachers within the school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 9  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As mid-point benchmark, by February 2019, 75% of students with disabilities in grades 3-5 will demonstrate progress of at least two levels on the Teachers College Learning Progression for Information Writing in Teachers College Units of Study Framework of key writing skills. Students will demonstrate progress in at least two individual traits of standards-based writing skills. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers will use Teachers College Units of Study Learning Progression for Information Writing to show improved student achievement in writing to sources. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of multiple sources of data on student performance trends, including NYS ELA exams, Periodic Assessments, student work products, indicates there is a need for greater collaboration in teacher teams to analyze student work for inquiry and instructional planning. Teacher teams logs and feedback to school leaders evidence when teams work collaboratively to focus specific strategies and use inquiry to determine success or a need to adjust strategies. Trends indicate similar needs and successes occur across classes on a grade and also vertically from grade to grade. Across the school there is a need to improve student reading comprehension through higher-order thinking skills and deeper questioning. When teams work together to plan for students at multiple entry levels, all students improve comprehension, including students performing at levels 1 and 2. Our focus for next year is to have inquiry in teacher teams on each grade level to improve literacy skills. These teacher teams will support the Advanced Literacy Skills shifts that will increase student achievement, especially SWD and ENLs. Teachers will analyze data, classroom practices, student work, and share best practices so that all students, including subgroups can master literacy goals. Through teacher teams on each grade level, teachers will build capacity for leadership skills in directly affecting student learning outcomes to prepare students for college, careers, and independent living. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, ELA Inquiry teams in grades 3-5 will collaboratively analyze student performance on the NYC Performance Tasks to improve ELA skills as measured by an increase in student scores of at least 3 points on the End of Year NYC ELA Performance Task when compared to the NYC Performance Task Baseline administered in September. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school will conduct a needs assessment across all grades to determine baseline ELA proficiency for all populations and all subgroups to identify students’ instructional level, to inform instructional groups, to identify strengths and weaknesses. Teachers will analyze student performance on the NYC ELA Performance Task and other assessments, such as running records and work products, to inform instruction and create meaningful rubrics that provide specific and helpful feedback to students, including intervention support and align the curricula across grades and disciplines so all students, including SWD, ENL, gifted will demonstrate increased mastery of advanced literacy skills. Teachers will use ReadyGen, supplemented by Fundations, Wilson, Fountas & Pinnell Literacy Intervention System kits, and research-based programs. Teachers College Units of Study in writing will be extended this year. Professional development will be provided through NYC DOE, Queens North Field Support and District 30 for the principal, school leaders, teachers and paraprofessionals Support will be provided for students with disabilities, English language learners, and high-needs students by teachers, paraprofessionals, SETSS, guidance counselors. Research-based programs such as Wilson, Fountas & Pinnell Literacy Intervention System, web-based sites, etc. will be used for differentiated instruction. After-school programs will be offered, as will “at risk” services by Speech teachers and special educators.St Parent outreach will be provided to support families in assisting their children. Parent workshops and interactive family events will be planned to increase family engagement in support of literacy and student progress, and English language acquisition for parents. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leaders, teachers Teachers September 2018-November 2018 School Leaders, Grade leaders, teacher teams September 2018-2019 Principal, school leaders, teachers Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, school leaders, teacher teams Students performing at levels 1 and 2 September 2018-June 2019 School leaders, content specialists, special educators, teacher teams Parents and families September 2018-June 2019 School leaders, Parent Coordinator 2  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent outreach will be provided to support families in assisting their children from September 2018-June 2019. Parent workshops and interactive family events will be planned to increase family engagement in support of literacy and student progress, and English language acquisition for parents. Teacher teams will communicate high expectations to parents and provide parents with timely feedback so that parents are able to support their children. The school will expand student-centered parent conferences together with their teachers. Parents will become partners in the educational process through discussion with teachers, guidance counselors, community agencies to support student progress at levels. Teachers will provide parents with the necessary tools to support children at home through email, letter, newsletters, telephone conferences. In this way the process increases shared goals and practices which lead to increased student learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal and school leaders will facilitate professional development, family workshops and activities. Teachers and paraprofessionals will provide differentiated instruction. English as New Language Coordinator and special educators, Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) providers will collaborate for inquiry and instructional planning during extended days and during collaborative planning periods during the day. After school programs will provide support. School leaders, teachers, Parent Coordinator, and social worker will facilitate family workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As mid-point benchmark, by February 2019, 75% of students performing at levels 1 and 2 in grades 3-5 will show an increase of at least two reading levels on the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Running Records Assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers will use the Teachers College Running Records to measure progress to meet the goal of a minimum of 3 points growth on the End of Year NYC ELA Performance Task. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of 2018 NYS ELA and Mathematics exams show improvement in targeted areas of improved comprehension and writing and overall mathematical content and skills. Analysis of ADVANCE indicates teachers are implementing instructional strategies introduced through professional development, Teachers College Units of Study in Writing. Teachers are taking a lead role in the building of their instructional capacity. The school solicited teacher input on areas of need in order to develop Professional Learning Committees. These communities could be STEM, Advanced Literacy, and Differentiated Instruction. Certain teachers were selected as facilitators and were sent out for PD in these areas. These facilitators then conducted multiple PD sessions to turn key these elements to the staff and share best practices. As noted in the 2017-2018 Written Feedback to principal, the principal has expanded opportunities for distributed leadership practices so teachers have a shared vision and a key voice in decision making that affect student learning across the school. Teacher leaders attend professional development provided by NYC DOE, Queens North Field Support, and District support staff, universities, professional organizations and turn-key their learning. Teachers participate in professional study groups and inter-visitations to share best practices and reflect on how their learning can impact increased student learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will create and implement a professional development plan that builds teachers’ capacity to use Advanced Literacy Skills through refined assessment techniques and data analysis, differentiation, improved questioning and discussion techniques resulting in a 5% increase in teachers improving one performance level reflected in Danielson Framework component 3b Questioning and Discussion Techniques in Advance indicating an increase in the use of academic and high-impact vocabulary. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school will conduct a needs assessment across all grades to determine baseline ELA proficiency for all populations and all subgroups to identify students’ instructional level, to inform instructional groups, to identify strengths and weaknesses. The principal and school leaders will participate in professional development through NYCDOE, Queens North Field Support and District 30 support staff to refine leadership skills and build capacity through schoolwide protocols that support reading, writing, speaking, and listening toward improved instructional practice and increased student achievement. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leaders, teachers September 2018 - June 2019 School Leaders, Grade leaders, teacher teams Principal, Teachers September 2018-June 2019. Principal, Building leaders Teachers will attend professional learning opportunities to build capacity and improve instructional practice, including NYC DOE, Queens North Borough Field Support, etc. Teachers Teachers will participate in professional study groups and book study groups facilitated by lead teachers and building leaders to improve instructional practice in Advanced Literacy Skills and questioning and discussion techniques and increase awareness of social-emotional supports to drive student achievement. Teachers, building leaders Building leaders, teachers Building leaders September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers will share best practices and participate in inter-visitations to explore strategies and techniques to improve questioning and discussion practices. Teachers September 2018-2019 Building leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be encouraged to participate in school activities and events, participate in Parent Teacher Organization, Parent Teacher Conferences, and volunteer through Learning Leaders. Workshops will be provided during the day and evening on the school from September 2018-June 2019 to inform them of the school’s mission and goals. Parents will be invited to attend class celebrations and activities that reflect the school goals. Translators will be provided during workshops so all parents can participate and take on positions of leadership within the school, including SLT, committees. Events, such as Family Night, Read Aloud Day, and Curriculum Nights will provide opportunities to engage families in learning about school goals and curricula. For parents who are unable to have an active presence within the building will be provided with strategies on how to support their children at home. Letters, notices, and 5  News and Views will be distributed for parents, as well as digital resources. In this way, parents are able to be informed and take an active role in the educational process to support their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Building leaders will work with school staff to plan and implement professional learning opportunities to extend and refine instructional practices, increase awareness of social-emotional needs of students, build content and pedagogical knowledge and skills to promote increased student achievement. Lead teachers will facilitate professional study groups with materials purchased with school funds during extended days on Mondays and Tuesdays. Teachers will attend professional learning opportunities provided by NYC DOE, District support staff, universities and professional organizations, and through inter-visitations within the school and off-site. Teachers will meet during scheduled collaborative planning sessions during the week to share best practices and analyze student work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As a mid-year benchmark, by February 2019, a review of teacher observations will demonstrate a 3% increase in teachers improving one performance level as reflected in Danielson Framework component 3b Questioning and Discussion Techniques in Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Building leaders will use Danielson Framework to measure teachers' instructional level in component 3b Questioning and Discussion Techniques. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of the data including NYC School Survey, sign-in sheets for school-family engagement events, including Parent-Teacher Conferences, meeting, workshops, inter-active learning activities with students and families, indicates positive results in this area. As noted in the 2017-2018 Written Feedback on Principal Performance Observation, all members and constituents are included in the decision making process. One specific example of parent outreach was a school wide survey administered regarding physical activity at school. At the final SLT meeting held in June 2018, members of the SLT communicated that they felt very much a part of the decision making process. In addition, the high expectations and supports for students are communicated through a broad range of resources, such as student planners, Skedula PupilPath, eboard, classroom dojo, parent meetings, Broadcast (telephone communication system), and emails. A review of attendance records and OORS reports indicates students performing at the lowest third in the school often have higher percentages of absence, lateness, and/or incidents of poor behavior. A review of parent workshops indicates families have opportunities to expand school-family partnership through affiliations with school-based personnel such as guidance counselors and administration, Youth Development Team, Attendance Team. Other supports include Learning Leaders, social worker, community resources, cultural organization, Dial-a-Teacher, Queens Library System, school-wide events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will expand its collaborative partnership with families and community organizations as measured by a 1% increase in positive responses on the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent workshops will be provided monthly to encourage improved school-family partnership to promote increased student achievement. Families, teachers September 2018-June 2019 Building leaders, teachers, parent coordinator Opportunities for parent teacher conferences will be provided to extend the school - family partnership is promoting increased students achievement at least 4 times a year. Teachers, families Communication resources, including parent letters in English and native languages, flyers, telephone calls, email, Broadcast telephone outreach, News and Views, e-Board, Pupilpath, Class Dojo, REMIND and school web sites will inform families of school events and activities. Families School sponsored activities will be planned to expand school and home partnerships, including Parent Nights, ENL Parent Club, Meet the Staff Night, Family Fun Nights, Parent -Teacher Conferences, afterschool programs. Families September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018-2019 Building leaders, teachers Building leaders, teachers, Parent Coordinator September 2018-2019 Building leaders, teachers, Parent Coordinator Family workshops will be provided to build capacity in topics such as English language acquisition, nutrition, community and cultural resources, family finance and health, etc. Families September 2018-2019 Building leaders, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Little Orchestra Society, NY Edge Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation, American Ballroom Theater, Noguchi Museum, Magic Box, Readers and Writers Collaborative, Council member Costa Constantinides, Apple Education, Sanford Harmony Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, guidance counselor, paraprofessionals and building leaders will refine structures to support student progress through academic and behavioral supports during the school day. Parent outreach will be provided by school staff during the day and the extended school days on Monday and Tuesdays. Collaborative planning sessions 8  will be scheduled during the school day. Professional learning will be provided during the extended days, or by participation in workshops or conferences with per diem coverage as needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As a mid-year benchmark, by February 2019, analysis of sign-in sheets will indicate progress toward meeting the goal by a 5% increase in family engagement in school and classroom events, family workshops, and school activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Workshop and school activities sign-in sheets and participation notices reflecting events will be reviewed to indicate increased family participation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Student performance at levels 1 or 2 on NYS ELA exams in grades 3-8, low scores based on fall Periodic Assessment, teacher observations, student writing based on units of study Student performance at levels 1 or 2 on NYS Math exams in grades 3-8, low scores based on fall Periodic Assessment, teacher observations, GoMath units of study Student performance at levels 1 or 2 on NYS Science exams, teacher observations, unit tests Student performance at low levels based on teacher observations, unit tests Frequent absences or lateness, behaviors that interfere with learning, generalized low performance in Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided reading, repeated readings, interactive writings, differentiated instruction, ReadyGen for re-teaching, Wilson, Fundations Double Dose Go Math modifications and reteach, manipulative materials, games, problem-solving strategies Differentiated instruction (FOSS), repeated readings, hands-on investigations Differentiated instruction, repeated instruction Counseling sessions by guidance counselor, school psychologist, social worker, Substance Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small groups, one-to-one tutoring During the school day, after school Small groups, one-to-one tutoring During the school day, after school Small groups, one-to-one tutoring During the school day, after school Small groups, one-to-one tutoring During the school day, after school Small groups, one-to-one tutoring or counseling During the school day 0  academic areas according to State standards Home visits Abuse Prevention and Intervention Specialist(SAPIS) worker, parent outreach, attendance teacher, coordination of support service agencies. At-risk health related services conduct speech and hearing screenlngs. Provide phonological awareness, auditory processing activities to facilitate comprehension, articulation therapy to improve speech production of deviant speech, receptive and expressive language processing lessons to develop communication skills and improve comprehension of incoming information in oral and written work, and fluency therapy. Special educators provide at-risk intervention in content areas as well as Wilson. 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Not Applicable Not Applicable Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 21 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2 Basic instructional supplies, backpack, books, dictionary, ruler and math materials, complete school uniform, supplementary books, planner, etc. Academic Intervention Services provided by a teacher in small groups. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 16938 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Not Applicable 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Not Applicable Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable 4  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Not Applicable 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 5  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  6   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 122 Mamie Fay School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 122 Mamie Fay School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 8  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Organization, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association, and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 9  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association, and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 122 Mamie Fay School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 0  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 1  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 3  ● always try my best to learn. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Newcomers Program, Grades 1-5, will be comprised of twenty-two (22) sessions during the months of December, January, and February 2018-19, from 2:35 p.m. to 4:05 p.m., approximately 2 days per week. The ENL teacher who will teach this class holds certifications in both common branch and TESOL. The teacher will use ELL methodology, including native language support, to teach newcomers the foundations of the English language, as well as provide a differentiated instruction program based on the needs of the students attending the program. The overall focus for these students will be to learn print concepts, phonological awareness, phonics and word recognition that will lead to work on fluency, using emergent reader texts. These students will also engage in English conversation, practice listening skills, practice reading skills, introduce grammar skills, and increase English vocabulary in a stress-free environment. Instruction will be differentiated and customized depending on student grade and proficiency level. In order to supplement & differentiate learning in this after-school program, this program may include a three or more of the following resources: Lively Letters by Reading TLC, Explode the Code consumable worktext, Cornerstone Newcomer consumable worktexts, Pearson Newcomer Language Central consumable worktexts and Practice Books, ReadyGen, Phonics K level, SPIRE Program, Wilson Fundations, Words Their Way for ELLs word study program, Just Right Reading supplemental books, and the ESL Rigby Guided Reading Program, as well as access to iPads that provide educational software, such as ReadWorks, Reading A-Z, Starfall, and BrainPop ESL. All of the aforementioned materials are supplemental, except ReadyGen, and are not used in daily instruction. In addition, teacher created materials, Bilingual literature, Bilingual glossaries, picture dictionaries, and photographic learning cards will be used by the students to augment learning. Lesson plans will reflect NYS Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS). An administrator will be available to supervise all programming at no cost to Title III. P.S. 122 Title III program will also provide all English Language Learners with supplemental ENL instruction during after-school hours for students in Grades 1-5. The After-school ENL Language Enrichment Program will be comprised of approximately 14 sessions, operating from December 2018 until January 2019, from 2:35 p.m. to 3:50 p.m., approximately 2 days a week. Group size will be maintained at no more than 15 students per teacher. There will be a total of four (4) ENL classes - one (1) 1st Grade class, one (1) 2nd and 3rd Grade class, one (1) 3rd and 4th Grade class, and one (1) 4th and 5th Grade class. Four (4) dually certified TESOL and common branch teachers will provide supplemental instruction in alignment with NYS NGLS. After-school instruction for Grades 1-5 will focus on improving the four language modalities: listening, speaking, reading, and writing based on students' NYSESLAT scores and ELA scores. Just Right Reading (Levels A-E) and Keep on Reading Comprehension Across the Curriculum (Levels C-F) consumable worktexts, Ready New York NGLS ELA Instruction (Levels 3-6), Oxford Picture Dictionary for the Content Areas, photographic learning cards, Bilingual literature and dictionaries, as well as educational software such as BrainPop, Reading A-Z, ABC Mouse, and Starfall, will be used to supplement and differentiate learning in this after-6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information school program. This additional support will also help students in the testing grades to achieve higher scores on the ELA, NYSESLAT, and NYS Science examinations. An administrator will be available to supervise all programming at no cost to Title III. In the spring of 2019, we will provide four (4) after-school classes – one (1) Grade 1 class, one (1) Grades 1 and 2 class, one (1) Grade 3 class, one (1) Grade 4 class, and one (1) Grade 5 class of ELL students in a series of 4 sessions at 1.25 hours for NYSESLAT preparation. Group size will be maintained at no more than 15 students per teacher. Students will learn testing strategies by dually certified TESOL and common branch teachers to improve listening, reading, writing, and speaking skills. Supplementary materials, including Continental Press NYSESLAT preparation texts, NYSESLAT prep booklets, and photographic learning cards will be used to enhance language acquisition and augment English language instruction. All student records for these programs will be maintained, including student attendance and program notification in parent's preferred languages, in the CR Part 154/Title III 2018-19 Binder, located in the ELL Coordinator's Office. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The goal of our school is to ensure that all general education teachers and ELL teaching staff are trained in dealing with English language learners in all phases of language acquisition. This training will be fulfilled by attending in-house Professional Development (PD)/Professional Learning Communities (PLC), workshops offered by the DOE, Teachers College, and other providers, in order to be in compliance with the State Department of Education. Teachers attending these PDs or workshops will be at no cost to Title III. These PD opportunities will focus on improving core instruction and differentiation of instruction both during the school day and during the ENL Afterschool Enrichment Program. P.S. 122 Title III Professional Development will focus on providing new and long-term teachers with ENL training, helping to prepare former ELLs who have made the transition into a general education classroom, as well as ENL teachers who need to help ELLs meet and exceed NGLS. One objective in having our teachers attend Professional Development sessions is to help ELLs and former ELLs achieve grade level scores on all NY City and State assessments. Professional Development and PLC (Professional Learning Communities) sessions provided by PS 122 and other providers, and are highly recommended to our teachers, include, but are not limited to, the following areas: The Four Hallmarks of Advanced Literacies, SIOP Model, making content comprehensible for ELLs, SPIRE Program, Passport for Social Studies, reviewing data to inform instruction, scaffolding content in subject specific learning, adapting content area instruction through best teaching practices for ELLs, STEM education, Algebra for ALL, social and emotional learning, incorporating technology in the classroom, physical education, Special Education: Developing behavioral strategies to support students with special needs, etc. 7  Part C: Professional Development In house Professional Development will focus on providing PD to our ELL teaching staff in reviewing data to inform instruction and student groupings, specifically MOSL assessment results, NYS ELA, Math and Science scores, item skills analysis, NYSESLAT related ATS Reports (RNMR and RLAT), and other teacher assessments. Other PD topics will include scaffolding lessons for content area subjects, adapting content area through best teaching practices for ELLs, and using technology in the ELL classroom. These PD opportunities are at no cost to our Title III program. In the Spring of 2019, three (3) certified ENL teachers, including the ELL Coordinator and facilitator, will participate in after-school Professional Development. These sessions will address analysis of the rubrics for evaluating student performance on the NYSESLAT to improve targeted instruction for ELL students in the following academic school year. Title III funds will be utilized to pay the three participating ENL teachers to attend four (4) 2-hour sessions of after school PD to support the program. All PD records will be maintained, including agendas and attendance sheets, in the CR Part 154/Title III 2018-19 Binder, located in the ELL Coordinator's Office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In the spring of 2019, there will be two (2) Family Nights, dedicated to parental support in literacy and mathematics. Two TESOL trained pedagogues will assist with parental activities. Other working pedagogues and all other costs related to these activities will not be charged to Title III. The parent coordinator will also assist in accommodating any parental needs at no cost to Title III. Parent workshops related to ELLs will be facilitated by the ELL Coordinator, ENL Teachers, Parent Coordinator, and other teaching staff, and administrators. In addition, parents will be invited to attend a workshop exclusively dedicated to understanding the NYSESLAT in spring 2019. These grade level workshops will be led by either a certified TESOL Teacher or the ELL Coordinator at no cost to Title III. The workshops will address the following: 1. Parents’ familiarity in the math NGLS and be coached in how to use math strategies in problem solving. 2. Parents’ familiarity with the NYSESLAT to help their children prepare for the exam. 3. Parents’ familiarity with the English Language Arts NGLS. 4. Parents increasing their English language skills by offering a series of ten (10) English as a New Language classes. To ensure our success, we work collaboratively with our ELL parents. We provide them with classes to help them become English proficient. In the spring of 2019, PS 122 Title III program will provide a series of ten (10) adult ENL classes. Side By Side Texts and Workbooks (Levels 8  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities 1-2) and teacher made materials will be used to supplement learning in this after-school program for parents. Two (2) certified ENL teachers on our staff will lead the classes. Parents will learn beginner and intermediate levels of English vocabulary, grammar, and conversation. An administrator will be available to supervise all programming at no cost to Title III. Also, many parent workshops that are presented during the weekday at the school will be at no cost to Title III. An administrator will be available to supervise all programming. The parent coordinator will also assist in accommodating any parental needs. We also intend to provide interpreting services for Family Nights and various curriculum workshops given throughout the year. PS 122 also uses these opportunities to inform the parents of how to become involved in their child’s education. We firmly believe that by working together in partnership we can elevate the level of each child’s achievement. Additionally, at P.S. 122, we plan to provide translation of critical documents, major announcements of meetings (e.g. Parent Teacher Conferences), after-school programs, parent workshops, and parental options concerning their child. By sending these parents translated documents, we hope to enable all parents to be informed participants, as well as active in all aspects of our school community. Translation services will be provided by in-house staff when feasible or the NYCDOE Translation and Interpreting Unit. PS 122 will evaluate the needs of the parents through outreach in parent meetings, conferences, workshops and school activities with translation services available. The Parent Coordinator provides welcoming opportunities to encourage parent participation schoolwide. All parent engagement records will be maintained, including program notification in parent's preferred languages, in the CR Part 154/Title III 2018-19 Binder, located in the ELL Coordinator's Office. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 9662  Per session  Per diem Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. •Newcomers Program (22 sessions x 1.5 hr. x 1 teacher @ $60.65= $2002 •Afterschool ENL Enrichment 14 sessions x 1.25 hr. x 4 teachers @ $58.43= $4,091 •Afterschool NYSESLAT Preparation 4 sessions x 1.25 hrs. x 5 teachers @ $58.43=$1,461 •ENL Class for Adults 9  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Purchased services  High quality staff 2822 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 4 sessions in April x 1.25 hrs. x 2 teacher @$58.43= 585 + 6 sessions in May x 1.25 hrs x 2 teachers @ 59.56=$894 Total 1479 Parent Workshop Literacy/Math 2 Sessions x 3 hrs. x 2 teachers @ $58.43 = $702 General Supplies/Books/Educational Software (20% OTPS) for student and parent after-school programs. Some of the following items may be purchased for supplemental instruction, depending on cost and available funds: iPads, iPad covers, headphones, splitter cables, SPIRE program books, Side By Side text and workbooks for parents (Levels 1 and 2), Explode the Code, Cornerstone Newcomer consumable worktexts, Pearson Newcomer Language Central consumable worktexts and Practice Book, Levels A-E Easy Readers, Just Right Reading (Levels A-E) and Keep on Reading (Levels C-F) consumable worktexts, Ready NY CCLS (Grades 3-6) Continental Press NYSESLAT preparation texts, Bilingual books and dictionaries, photographic learning cards, general instructional supplies such as chart paper, crayons, markers, pens, binders, notebooks, folders and storage 0 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. containers to support the After-school ENL Enrichment and Newcomers Program. Starfall, Reading A-Z, BrainPop ESL Three (3) certified TESOL teachers will participate in after school Professional Development. These sessions will address analysis of the rubrics for evaluating student performance on the NYSESLAT to improve targeted instruction for the children. Title III funds will be utilized to pay the three participating ENL teachers to attend four (4) 2-hour sessions of after school PD to support the program; the cost = $1456 14414 Educational Software (Object Code 199) 500 Travel Other 1430 TOTAL 14414 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name PS122 Borough Queens School Number 122 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Anna Aprea Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Audrey Cheng,ELL Coordinator Teacher/Subject Area Athena Sfakianos, IEP Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Maria Anglo Superintendent Assistant Principal Alba Carlucci and Michael Pasc Coach School Counselor Parent Yuli Michael Parent Coordinator Judy Milo Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Ana Reyes, Psychologist C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 7 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 7 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics 2  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1361 Total number of ELLs 108 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.94% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools that our school uses to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs include: NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores, NYC Performance Assessments (MOSL), ReadyGen and Go Math units of study, TCRWP, Fountas and Pinnell, Wilson Reading Fundations assessments, and teacher classroom assessments and observations. Approximately twenty (20%) of our 2017-2018 ELL population reached proficiency on the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT. Less than 10% of the ELLs advanced three proficiency levels, 12% advanced two (2) levels, approximately 40% advanced one level, 37% remained at the same level, and only one student went back one level. Therefore over 60% of our students have shown marked improvement by advancing one level or higher on the NYSESLAT. However, the majority of the 37% of ELLS that remained at the same proficiency level did show improvement in one or more modalities. These students, particularly in the 3  Second Grade, received ten or more points higher on their overall total score compared to their total score on the NYSESLAT the previous year. Those students who remained at the same proficiency level and the overall score was less than the previous year was approximately 15% of that total. Teachers will be providing extra support in class to those ELLs who remained the same and did not show progress on the overall test score. Many of the students that scored at the Expanding level demonstrated that they need more support in the listening, reading, and writing modalities. This data has helped inform our school's instruction plan by adopting Advanced Literacy to boost our Tier I instruction and Title III supplemental after-school programs for the 2017-18 school year. In addition, we will continue to use ReadyGen and TCRWP to meet the rigor expected in following the CCLS, as well as providing Tier 2 interventions, differentiated instruction, small group instruction, AIS and other supplemental school based support programs for our at-risk ELLs, to help close the gap in reaching grade level standards and proficiency on the NYSESLAT. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures PS 122 has in place to guide instructional planning is the creation of an Advanced Literacy Team that includes administrative staff, Lead Teachers from every grade, as well as specialized teachers (i.e. ELL, Science, and Social Studies teachers to name a few). The goal of this collaboration is for these Lead Teachers to turn key best literacy teaching practices to other teachers across the grades during collaborative planning periods (CPP). PD will be provided to Lead Teachers to support this effort. During these CPP meetings, teachers will also use formative assessments to norm a broad lens for vertical and horizontal alignment of instruction. The school mission is to improve Tier I instruction in all classrooms by adapting the four hallmarks of Advanced Literacy instruction: reading, writing, speaking, and listening. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? PS 122 evaluates the success of its ELL programs by examining and comparing the results of students' NYSESLAT scores and other assessments (NYSITELL, NYS ELA, Math, and Science exam, teachers’ assessments, Running Records, NYC Performance Assessments etc.). In the past couple of years, we have noticed marked progress from the beginning of the school year to the end of the school year for the majority of our ELLs. In furthering the success of our ELL programs, which are aligned to the CCLS, we use the results of these various assessments to guide classroom instruction, as well as customize instruction for small group and 1:1 instruction, and after-school supplemental programming. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the data from the summative assessments has been gathered and analyzed during the CPP, classroom teachers are more informed when planning Tier II and III instruction for their students. Tier II academic intervention at our school consists of small group instruction, guided reading, center-based learning, and after-school programs. Tier III instruction includes 1:1 instruction, AIS, or At-Risk services. Students at this level of customized learning may receive one or more of the following: a double dose of phonics instruction through Wilson Fundations, G&T Peer Tutoring, or a Learning Leader. G&T Tutors and Learning Leaders are also trained in using the Great Leaps Reading Program, Fluency Tool Kit, etc. to assist classroom teachers with Tier III instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] PS 122 uses the following data to guide instruction for ELLs within the RTI framework for grades K-5: • Data Analysis and EDAT • NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores • NYS ELA, Math, and Science scores • NYC Performance Assessments, Fall and Spring (MOSL) • Units of study assessments related to ReadyGEN and Go Math • Running Records • Teacher created assessments and observations The RTI framework that our school uses to guide instruction for our ELLs is a 3 tier approach. The first tier of intervention 4  begins using high quality evidence-based instruction, differentiated instruction, and ELL centered instruction and strategies that provide academic language development and increased proficiency in listening, speaking, reading and writing. If ELL students, who are not newcomers, demonstrate below grade level proficiency on many of the assessments mentioned above, then struggling ELLs will be considered for Tier 2, more targeted and intensive academic support. If after a period of time a student does not show significant improvement on assessments while on Tier 2, then the ELL student may be recommended for Tier 3 to further tailor instruction related to the language and learning needs of that student. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSITELL and NYSESLAT Data patterns across proficiency levels After examining the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results (post 2017 NYSESLAT) in the overall proficiency levels, we have noted the following patterns: • 21% of our ELL population reached proficiency • 57% of our ELLs are at the Expanding (advanced) level • 12% of our ELLs are at the Transitioning (High intermediate) level • 7% of our ELLs are at the Emerging (low intermediate) • less than 5% of our ELL population is at the Entering (Beginner) level Percentage of Kindergarten ELL students by proficiency level: Commanding: 12% Expanding: 68% Transitioning: 8% Emerging: 12% Entering: 0% Percentage of First Grade ELL students by proficiency level: Commanding: 15% Expanding: 50% Transitioning: 20% Emerging: 15% Entering: 0% Percentage of Second Grade ELL students by proficiency level: Commanding: 18% Expanding: 70% Transitioning: 12% Emerging: 0% Entering: 0% Percentage of Third Grade ELL students by proficiency level: Commanding: 27% Expanding: 36% Transitioning: 27% Emerging: 0% Beginner: 10% Percentage of Fourth Grade ELL students by proficiency level: Commanding: 20% Expanding: 60% Transitioning: 0% Emerging: 10% 5  Beginner: 10% Percentage of Fifth Grade ELL students by proficiency level: Commanding: 63% Expanding: 37% Transitioning: 0% Emerging: 0% Beginner: 0% Approximately twenty percent (20%) of our 2016-2017 ELL population reached proficiency on the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT. The highest number of our ELLs who reached proficiency was in the Fifth Grade. The highest number of our ELLs, approximately 60% of our ELL population, was at the Expanding (advanced) level. We attribute this success to effective classroom teaching, differentiated instruction, and careful instructional planning based on data analysis. We also credit this positive outcome to the majority of these ELL students' participation in supplemental ENL after-school enrichment classes, as well as AIS after-school programs for some ELL students who were at-risk. This additional learning in their school day helped these ELLs to progress in learning their English language skills. We will continue these programs for our ELLs for the 2017-18 academic year. The percentage of total ELLs (22%) who are currently at the Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning stages are for the most part ELLs who are newcomers or struggling students. To help increase the proficiency levels of these ELLs for 2017-18, we will provide these students with RTI or AIS, and after-school program support. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In the beginning of the school year, we provide ELL PD that focuses on item skills analysis for ELA and Math, and analysis of the NYSESLAT results to guide instruction during the school day and for ENL related after-school programs. ELL teachers across the grades are grouped together in the following grade bands K-3, 3-4, 5-6, etc. to help support one another in bridging instruction. Service providers and content specialists also participate in these meetings. ELL teachers use the data to share best teaching practices and strategy lessons to improve Tier I classroom instruction and Tier II small group intervention. Attention is also devoted to improving customized instruction for Newcomers. ELL teachers also share these findings with parents during an Annual ELL meeting (in addition to PTC) and/or Parent Engagement Tuesdays. Discussions focus on individual student results and benchmarks. This process allows parents the opportunity to work collaboratively with the classroom teacher in reaching customized academic goals for their child throughout the school year. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Delivery of instruction In honoring parents' first choice selections, our school employs a Freestanding ENL with Native Language Support Program to meet the diverse needs of our ELLs. All ELLs and FELLs, as well as alternate placement and Special Education students, are for the most part, either in a discrete ENL class or are serviced by a push-in/pull-out ENL teacher. We have a total of seven ESOL certified teachers. In Kindergarten through fifth grade classes, ELLs are generally placed in heterogeneous, discrete ENL classes, primarily composed of fifty percent or less of ELLs/former ELLs (in Grades 1-5), and the remainder is composed of General Education students. Our dually licensed classroom 6  teachers of ELLs in Grades K-3 and Grade 5 (hold both a Common Branch and ESOL certifications) whom provide both Stand-alone ENL instruction and Integrated ENL instruction. Based on their students' English proficiency levels, these teachers plan their instructional day by incorporating the required units of study minutes for Stand-Alone ENL and/or Integrated ENL to meet the diverse needs of their ELLs and FELLs. The ELL Coordinator is also dually certified in Common Branch and ESOL. She uses the push-in and pull-out model to service ELLs and FELLs who are in self-contained Special Education classes, ICT Classes, the 4th Grade, and middle schoolers. Each student receives the required units of study minutes for Stand-Alone ENL and/or Integrated ENL to meet the needs of this diverse group of ELLs and FELLs. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Instructional Minutes At PS 122, the ENL program schedule for all Freestanding ENL with native language support classroom settings and push-in/pull-out services follows the required number of minutes set by CR Part 154 for all ELLs, in any subgroup, in the following way: •Entering and Emerging Students -Receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week through the content areas (Balanced Literacy, Math, Science or Social Studies), using ESL methodology and native language support. -Embedded within the 360 minutes for Entering students is 180 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. -Embedded within the 360 minutes for Emerging students is 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, and the remaining 90 minutes are used at the teacher’s discretion as standalone or integrated ENL instructional time with ELA or any other content area. Classroom and push-in/pull out teacher tailor the flexible remainder of minutes to meet the needs of their students. • Transitioning and Expanding Students -Recieve180 minutes of ENL instruction per week through the content areas (Balanced Literacy, Math, Science or Social Studies), using ESL methodology and native language support. -Embedded within the 180 minutes for Transitioning students is 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, and the remaining 90 minutes are used at the teacher’s discretion as standalone or integrated ENL instructional time with ELA or any other content area. -Students at the Expanding level receive180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. • Former ELLs (2 additional years of ENL instructional support after reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT) -Receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction per week, using ESL methodology. All teachers of ELLs are required to indicate what blocks of time are used for standalone ENL or integrated ENL on their program schedule. These program schedules must be approved by each teacher's assigned supervisor, making certain that all ELLs and FELLs are receiving the correct number of mandated minutes per week in standalone and integrated ENL instruction for their diverse population of ELLs/FELLs in their classroom. For more, see response to question #1. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 7  Delivery of content areas in each program model In order to improve access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development, teachers use ESL methodology to teach their students throughout the content areas. Best Teaching Practices for ELLs are used when teaching ELA, science, social studies, mathematics, and other core curriculum subjects. Special attention is applied to learning academic language, content area vocabulary, and skills through Advanced Literacy. In addition, bilingual glossaries and classroom libraries, manipulatives, and picture dictionaries are used. Lesson plans include content area and language objectives that are aligned to the CCLS. ELLs in self-contained Special Education and ICT classes are serviced by a push-in/pull-out ENL teacher. The push-in/pull-out teacher works with the ELLs through the content area subjects in collaboration with the classroom teacher. Teachers meet to plan instruction and analyze student performance at weekly collaborative preparation periods. The push-in/pull-out ENL teacher provides support services in vocabulary development, making content area lessons comprehensible, and facilitating language acquisition. The push-in model is used whenever possible as it helps to decrease travel time and increase in-class instructional time. Instructional decisions that are considered when delivering core content to our ELLs and FELLs include regularly assessing and modifying instructional goals for both linguistic and cognitive demands. Our teachers also assess and take inventory on what multiple entry points their students respond to best to grasp academic language, concepts, and skills in their lessons related to core content. Some building blocks for increasing knowledge, at a more rapid rate, in the core content areas include building background, vocabulary preview, visuals, technology, authentic learning experiences, providing opportunities and multiple exposure for listening and speaking activities, careful thought to student grouping and pairings (including in their native language to provide native language support), and providing appropriate scaffolding (as needed). These best practices and more are used to design and modify instruction to help make the information students are learning more comprehensible and meaningful, as well as increase students' knowledge in the content areas. In making sure that content area lessons are not only ELL/FELL learner friendly, we also ensure that the delivery of these lessons is aligned to the Common Core. Therefore, teachers of ELLs and FELLs use grade level and age appropriate materials such as Go Math, ReadyGEN, FOSS kits for science in grades K-5, Fundations, Harcourt for Social Studies and for Science supplement, Ready NY CCLS, and NYSESLAT test prep booklets. In addition, teachers also use the following resources to increase student knowledge in the content areas: Wilson Fundations, Words Their Way for ELLs, Rigby Reading Program for ELLs, and technology resources, which include Starfall, Reading A-Z, RAZKIDS, and other web-based, child-friendly sites. All classes have leveled classroom libraries. Native language support resources in the classroom include: bilingual libraries, glossaries/dictionaries, and technology resources (these resources are representative of the home languages present in our classrooms). Many of our classroom and content specialty rooms are equipped with SMART boards, and all have computers and projectors to improve student learning of ENL for our ELLs and FELLs. In addition, school personnel, such as bilingual teaching staff and paraprofessionals are utilized to provide ELLs language support in clarifying content and concepts in specific subject areas. Native language support is also provided to our Newcomer ELLs across the grades, needing AIS in reading. They are paired with trained Learning Leaders that speak the same home language as the child. Bilingual teaching staff and paraprofessionals also assist in helping to communicate to many of our students' families how they can help their child at home. In addition, our gifted & talented (G&T) students in our middle school academy have a block of time in their schedule dedicated to community service. ENL teachers have partnered with this program by providing training to these selected G&T students in how to assist struggling ELLs, in any subgroup, in supplemental math and reading support. Bilingual, middle school, G&T students in our academy, representative of the home languages of our ELLs, are often selected to provide this work of service. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Native Language Evaluation In order to ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language, PS 122 ensures the following: 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 8  SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiating instruction for ELL Subgroups In order to differentiate instruction for ELL subgroups, homeroom ELL teachers and push-in/pull-out ELL teachers provide 1:1 and small group lessons and activities that are tailored to various ELL students' needs. Teachers also use multiple entry points in lesson delivery and student engagement to address the diverse needs in their ENL classroom. Homeroom ELL teachers also collaborate with AIS providers that offer tailored support services for the following ELL subgroups: ENL newcomer students, ELLs who are performing under grade level, long-term ELLs, and SIFE students. In addition, the ENL teacher provides one-on-one and/or small group instruction using various strategies in the content areas, including Wilson Fundations as targeted intervention programs. Newcomer ELLs across the grades, needing AIS, are paired with a trained Learning Leader that speaks the same home language as the child. We also invite these students to attend either the Newcomers or ENL Enrichment After- school Program. Summer school is offered, as appropriate. Other community programs are recommended for continued learning. If the classroom teacher feels that the student needs more intense intervention, the teacher will consider RTI, Tier 2 and 3, to help the student. If after Tier 2 and 3, an ELL continues to struggle, the teacher will discuss her concerns with the Instructional Support Committee. Upon their recommendations, an IEP teacher will then administer an unofficial diagnostic screening to design an instructional program to help the student. The IEP teacher will then service the student on a one to one basis, according to the student’s needs for up to three times per week. For ELLs in Special Education or Collaborative Team Teaching classes, the push-in or pull-out teacher analyzes their Individual Educational Plan together with their NYSESLAT scores. The ENL provider works in collaboration with the classroom teacher to differentiate instruction to ensure the student’s needs are met. Balanced literacy lessons are made comprehensible for these students to enable them to increase their reading and writing skills, using Best Teaching Practices for ELLs. Lessons are infused with vocabulary development to increase language acquisition. As a transitional plan for Former ELLs (FELLs) who recently passed the NYSESLAT, 90 minutes of ENL instructional time is provided, as well as AIS services, if needed. FELLs are also invited to attend the After-School ENL Enrichment Program, if the parent and teacher feel the student can benefit from the extra instructional time. The ELL office in our school is always open to these students and they are encouraged to stop by to borrow books, receive extra help, use department computers for class assignments, and discuss any needs or concerns they may have. In addition, our gifted & talented students in our middle school academy have a block of time in their schedule dedicated to community service. ENL teachers have partnered with this program by providing training to these selected students in how to assist struggling ELLs, in any subgroup, in supplemental math and reading support. ENL teachers also plan and assess beforehand to tailor the supplemental materials used to help our ELLs in this volunteer program. Bilingual students, representative of the home languages of our ELLs, are often selected to provide this work of service. We currently do not have any SIFE students, but if a SIFE student were to enroll at our school, we would follow the NYS DOE Guidelines for Educating Limited English Proficient Students with Interrupted Formal Education (LEP/ ELL SIFE). Therefore, a SIFE's instructional plan would include the following: selection of appropriate instructional materials, building background knowledge, explicit vocabulary instruction in the content areas, scaffolding, native language support, and Best Teaching Practices for ELLs. Test accommodations are also differentiated for our ELL subgroups in the classroom and during State examinations. Except for the NYSESLAT, ELLs and FELLs are eligible for ELL testing accommodations, and can include additional accommodations listed on their IEPs or 504 plans, if applicable. These accommodations include time extensions (time-and-a-half), and when applicable, depending on the student, may also include separate location, third reading of listening section (ELA exams only), use of bilingual dictionaries and/or glossaries that only provide one-to-one translations of words, simultaneous use of English and alternative language editions (except on ELA exams), oral translations for low incidence languages (except on ELA exams and where there is no translated edition provided by SED), and writing responses in the home language (except on ELA exams). All these accommodations help to ensure that we are providing ample opportunity for ELLs and FELLs to demonstrate what they have learned in the content areas. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies & grade-level materials used by teachers of ELL-SWDs In order to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development, Teachers of ELL-SWDs 9  use Best Teaching Practices for ELLs and SWDs, Multiple Entry Points, Advanced Literacy, and Teachers College methods for reading and writing in their lessons. Grade level and age appropriate materials for these students include the following: teacher created materials, Wilson, Words Their Way for ELLs, Rigby Reading Program for ELLs, bilingual libraries, bilingual dictionaries/glossaries, Go Math, ReadyGEN, FOSS kits for science in grades K-5, Fundations, Harcourt for Social Studies and for Science supplement, NYSESLAT test prep booklets, and technology resources, which include Starfall, Reading A-Z, RAZKIDS, and other web-based, child-friendly sites. All classes have leveled classroom libraries, including English language and have access to bilingual libraries. Many of our classroom and content specialty rooms are equipped with SMART boards, and all have computers and projectors to improve student learning sites. All classes have leveled classroom libraries, including English language and have access to bilingual libraries. Many of our classroom and content specialty rooms are equipped with SMART boards, and all have computers and projectors to improve student learning. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Meeting diverse needs of ELL-SWDs All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs through equitable programming of courses, enrichment programs and opportunities, and school events. ELL-SWDs participate in all aspects of school activities, including but not limited to physical education, art, music, dance, trips, after-school and summer school programs. ELL-SWDs are scheduled for band, chorus, and lunch/recess, and after-school programs with their non-disabled peers. There are also ELL-SWDs in ICT classes, allowing these students to maximize time with their non-disabled peers. For ELLs in Special Education or Collaborative Team Teaching classes, the push-in/pull-out teacher analyzes their Individual Educational Plan together with their NYSESLAT scores. The ENL provider works in collaboration with the classroom teacher and other service providers to differentiate instruction for students in this subgroup, ensuring student’s needs are met by using Best Teaching Practices for ELLs and SWDs. Balanced literacy lessons are made comprehensible for these students to enable them to increase their reading and writing skills, using multiple entry points that best suit their learning needs. Lessons are infused with vocabulary development to increase language acquisition. In addition, content specialists are provided with professional development to enhance their instruction, incorporating ELL strategies in a least restrictive environment. SETTS and related services providers are also provided with professional development in English language acquisition to better serve their students and meet their diverse needs. We analyze multiple sources of data, including but not limited to academic performance teacher observations, reports from service providers, such as speech & language and school psychologist. In using this data and the recommendations from other evaluators, the recommendation for service in an ICT class supports the expectations that ELL-SWDs will be able to achieve their IEP goals in the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Description of targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other content areas To ensure that we service all students requiring intervention programs, we employ Academic Intervention Services (AIS) for newcomer ENL students, students in the general education population (FELLs) eligible for ENL services, ELLs and non-ELLs that have been re-identified, SIFE students, students with an IEP, and long-term ELLs, receiving 4-6 years of service. In addition, the ENL teacher provides 1:1 and/or small group instruction, using various strategies, including Wilson and Fundations as targeted intervention programs. We also invite these students to attend the After-school Newcomers and ENL Enrichment Program. Summer school is offered as appropriate. Other community programs are recommended for continued learning. Additionally, our gifted & talented students in our middle school academy have a block of time in their schedule dedicated to community service. ENL teachers have partnered with this program by providing training to these selected students in how to assist struggling ELLs, in any subgroup, in supplemental math and reading support. Bilingual students, representative of the home languages of our ELLs, are often selected to provide this work of service. If the classroom teacher feels that a student needs more intense intervention after he/she has received the first level of RTI and other aforementioned supplemental supports, the teacher will discuss her concerns with the Instructional Support Committee. Upon their recommendations, an IEP teacher will then administer an unofficial diagnostic screening to design an 0  instructional program to help the student. The IEP teacher will then service the student on a one-to-one basis, according to the student’s needs for up to three times per week. Currently, volunteers from Learning Leaders are being trained by our school's Resource Room Teacher in Wilson Fundations to assist in AIS for newcomer ELLs. Newcomer ELLs across the grades, needing AIS, will be paired with a Learning Leader that speaks the same home language as the child. In addition, RTI in science and social studies will be provided by the classroom teacher in small group 1:1 instruction in content area vocabulary development, using multi-sensory and/or technological and technical resources. Response to intervention in reading will address individual student needs and provide small group activities to help struggling students, including ELLs, in grades K-2. RTI will be provided in math through Go Math supplementary practice activities in class by the classroom teacher in small group and 1:1 instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? New programs or improvements for the upcoming school year Due to demonstrated student progress on the NYSESLAT (see Part III: Assessment Analysis section, responses to questions 1-3, for supporting data referenced here), PS 122 will continue to offer its Title III After-school Newcomers and ENL/ELA Enrichment programs for ELLs. Both programs provide instruction aligned to the CCLS. The only change we hope to make in supplemental after-school programming, budget permitting, is changing or adding instructional materials to also support ELLs in the content areas. Professional development (PD) will be another avenue used to improve student achievement for ELLs in the content areas. PD for 2017-18 for all teachers will focus on Advanced Literacy, building academic language, as well as inquiry to improve tracking student progress of ELLs, in all subgroups, in the content areas. In these learning opportunities, teachers will be given time to learn how to track student progress of ELLs (in all subgroups) and non-ELLs by reviewing and comparing state scores in the content areas, City-wide assessments, and teacher created assessments, as well as learn how to make adjustments in lesson planning and supplementary support services, as necessary, on a more frequent basis, to increase student progress towards reaching grade level standards in the content areas. Improvements we plan to make during the school day in response to many of our ELLs performing below grade level on NYS ELA and math examinations, is improving our core instruction by adopting Advanced Literacy, having more volunteers from Learning Leaders trained by our school's Resource Room Teacher in Wilson Fundations to assist in AIS for newcomer ELLs. Newcomer ELLs across the grades, needing AIS, will be paired with a Learning Leader that speaks the same home language as the child. In addition, our gifted & talented (G&T) students in our middle school academy have a block of time in their schedule dedicated to community service. ENL teachers have partnered with this program by providing training to these selected G&T students in how to assist struggling ELLs, in any subgroup, in supplemental math and reading support. Bilingual, middle school, G&T students in our academy, representative of the home languages of our ELLs, are often selected to provide this work of service. Moreover, we are using the Response To Intervention Program (RTI) for reading, which will address individual student needs and provide small group practice activities to help struggling students, including ELLs in any subgroup, in Grades K-2. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not Applicable. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Equal access to all school programs All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs through equitable programming of courses, enrichment programs and opportunities, and school events. ELLs, in all subgroups, participate in all aspects of school activities, including, but not limited to, physical education, art, music, dance, library access, trips, and after-school programs. For additional school day programs, please see response to question #9. Access to free after-school programs include: ENL Newcomers Program, ENL/ELA Enrichment Program, NYSESLAT Test Prep, AIS After-school Program in collaboration with Sports and Arts Foundation, NYSESLAT Test Prep, and ELA and Math Test Prep. Due to teacher-parent communication through meetings and letters, ELL attendance in these programs from Grades 1-6 is a success rate of approximately 95%. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 1  Instructional materials used to support ELLs Materials used to support ELLs in all subgroups include Go Math, ReadyGen, Ready NY CCLS, FOSS kits for science in grades K-5, Wilson Fundations, Harcourt for 2nd grade social studies and for science supplement, Leapfrog, NYSESLAT test prep booklets, Words Their Way, Just Right Reading, guided reading sets, teacher created materials and visuals, as well as technology resources, which include Starfall, Reading A-Z, RAZKIDS, BrainPop and other educational web-based, child-friendly sites. We use Great Leaps as appropriate. Many of our classrooms and content specialty rooms are equipped with SMART boards, and all have computers and projectors to improve student learning. Native language support resources in all ENL programmed classrooms include: bilingual libraries, content area glossaries, and dictionaries; these resources are representative of the home languages present in our classrooms. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Delivery of Native language support in each program model The ELL teaching staff uses various ELL strategies to teach their lessons across the content areas in their ENL programmed classrooms, with native language supports (by using bilingual libraries and glossaries, etc.), so students develop academic vocabulary in both English and their native language. Parents are often provided with bilingual literature and/or glossaries, and recommended educational websites to assist their child at home. In school, students are provided with bilingual picture dictionaries, bilingual word to word dictionaries, bilingual libraries with rich literature in various genres to help new ELLs develop their academic language skills. Newcomers are often encouraged to write in their home language during the writing block and other periods of the day to help make the transition from learning in their home language to English only. Materials used to teach the general curriculum are generally English only. However, when appropriate, and if available, the school will purchase copies of these materials in Spanish. Usually, Spanish is the only available language for these types of curriculum related materials. When possible, students are also partnered with a peer that speaks his/her home language to help the student follow the classroom flow of the day. For additional home language supports, please see response to question #3. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services, support and resources correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels (in all subgroups) through careful attention to student class/grade placement, IEPs (if applicable), grouping for small group instruction, and AIS. Support is provided by school administrators through programming special educators, guidance counselors, school psychologist, and social worker, and related service providers, as appropriate, through individual and/or small group counseling sessions for children of similar ages and or grades. For more information related to ELL-SWDs, please see response to #8. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials used to support ELLs Materials used to support ELLs in all subgroups include Go Math, ReadyGen, Ready NYCCLS, FOSS kits for science in grades K-5, Wilson Fundations, Harcourt for 2nd grade social studies and for science supplement, Leapfrog, NYSESLAT test prep booklets, Words Their Way, Just Right Reading, guided reading sets, teacher created materials and visuals, as well as technology resources, which include Starfall, Reading A-Z, RAZKIDS, BrainPop and other educational web-based, child-friendly sites. We use Great Leaps as appropriate. Many of our classrooms and content specialty rooms are equipped with SMART boards, and all have computers and projectors to improve student learning. Native language support resources in all ENL programmed classrooms include: bilingual libraries, content area glossaries, and dictionaries; these resources are representative of the home languages present in our classrooms. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Assisting newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year We assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year by inviting them to the school district's summer school ELL Enrichment Program, if available. If an email address has been provided, the Parent Coordinator will send information of City- wide DOE parent related events that are helpful to both new ELLs and their parents. Administrators and the Parent Coordinator welcome the new student and his/her family, providing guidance and information on general school practices, schedules and supports available. The classroom teacher welcomes the child and assigns a buddy. Lunch personnel greet the 2  child and support them through the lunch and recess process. The ELL Coordinator also provides informational sessions and provides a variety of resources to help their child adapt to a new environment and a variety of ways to assist their child academically at home. In the beginning of the school year, the Parent Coordinator offers separate Curriculum Workshops and Math Workshops for parents, with simultaneous interpretation, in our top three languages, Arabic, Bengali, and Spanish. Separating these bilingual sessions, allow parents to ask questions and be more informed about their child's education. Other academic related workshops are provided for parents with interpreters throughout the school year by the both the ELL and Parent Coordinator. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives offered to ELLs PS 122 provides English and translation of content area learning and assessment in various languages to the greatest extent possible. Our goal is to offer our newcomer ELLs academic resources in their native language for day to day classroom learning and professional translators for New York State required assessments. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? PD Plan for all ELL personnelP.S. 122 Professional Development will focus on providing PD to all staff including school administrators, general education teachers, ENL teaching staff, special education staff, subject area teachers, psychologists, guidance counselors, related service providers, paraprofessionals, secretarial and office staff, parent coordinator, and school aides. Differentiated professional development will include, but will not be limited to, the following: use of data to inform instruction, specifically, on how to review, analyze, and compare data from the following: ATS Reports (RNMR and RLAT), EDAT, ELA and Math Item Skill Analysis (ISA) Tool, Science Item Skills Analysis (ISA) Tool, NYC Performance Assessments, ReadyGen and GoMath units of study assessments, and other relevant school based assessments, as well as education in TCRWP, basic communications skills, allocating resources for translation services, guidance in meeting compliance and supporting family needs to name a few. Professional Development in-house for our ENL teaching staff and other personnel will address the following areas: data analysis, best teaching practices for all ELL subgroups, guided reading, vocabulary development, resources and use of native language supports for newcomers, multiple entry points, CCLS, and specific domains related to Danielson Framework. The goal of our school is to ensure that all general education teachers and ELL teaching staff are trained in dealing with English language Learners in all phases of language acquisition. This training will be fulfilled by attending in-house PDs and workshops offered by the DOE and Teachers College in order to be in compliance with the State Department of Education. These PD opportunities will focus on improving differentiation of instruction both during the school day and during after-school programs, such the Newcomers and the ENL/ELA After-school Enrichment Program, as well as the AIS, ELA and Math Test Prep Programs. P.S. 122 Professional Development will also focus on providing new teachers with ENL training, helping to prepare former ELLs who have made the transition into a general education classroom, as well as ENL teachers who need to help ELLs meet and exceed CCLS. One objective in having our teachers attend Professional Development sessions is to help ELLs and former ELLs achieve grade level scores on all City and State assessments. This training was started approximately 12 years ago. Professional Development sessions recommended to our all teachers and personnel include, but are not limited to, the following areas: RTI for ELLs, using data to guide instruction, scaffolding content area 3  subjects, adapting content area instruction through best teaching practices for ELLs. In house Professional Development will focus on providing PD to our ENL teaching staff in the use of data to inform instruction, specifically MOSL assessment results, NYS ELA, Math and Science scores, ATS Reports (RNMR and RLAT), EDAT, and item skills analysis, scaffolding content area subjects, and adapting content area through best teaching practices for ELLs. In-house ENL PD will be offered one to two times per month during the academic school year. Professional Development offered to teachers of ELLs related to Common Core Learning StandardsThe goal of our school is to ensure that all teaching staff is well trained in helping our ELLs, in all subgroups, make the CCLS achievable for them. This training will be fulfilled by attending workshops offered by the DOE, OELLs, in-house Professional Development, Hunter College, and other content related sources. Professional Development sessions recommended to our teachers include, but are not limited to, the following areas: RTI for ELLs (in all subgroups) and non-ELLs, best teaching practices in the content area subjects, differentiating instruction, strategies for academic language development, Danielson Framework, Wilson, and using data to inform instruction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ELL Staff Training and PDs Our school's goal is that all teachers and ELL teaching staff are trained in dealing with English Language Learners in all phases of language acquisition. This training will be fulfilled by attending workshops offered by the DOE and Teachers College in order to be in compliance with requirement as per CR Part 154.2. These PD opportunities will focus on providing differentiation of instruction both during the school day and during the ENL After-school Enrichment Program. In-house professional development will focus on Advanced Literacy, best teaching practices, building a strong Tier I for core instruction, RTI for ELLs, and Vocabulary instruction in the content areas. The ELL Coordinator keeps a record of in-house ENL related PDs. Record keeping includes the following: certificates of completion, agendas, handouts, attendance records etc. These records are kept in the CR PART 154/Title III Binder and stored in the ELL Coordinator's office. In addition, the school has purchased an on-line professional development subscription to Teq. Here teachers, providers, and specialists have the freedom to choose from a menu of CTLE certified courses in the website's library, allowing them to customize their ELL related PD and complete the required number of hours as per CR Part 154.2. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to parent-teacher conferences and other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians City-wide, PS 122 encourages its teachers of ELLs to meet annually with parents or guardians of ELLs during Parent Engagement Tuesdays. During this meeting, minimum of once a year, they are to discuss goals of the program, NYSESLAT results, and their child's language development progress, and language development needs in all the content areas. Teachers are required to make sure that a qualified interpreter/translator, in the preferred language of the parent/guardian, is present to provide parents this required information, as well as allow parents the opportunity to ask questions. Attendance for all ELL parents is recorded and logged by the teacher, which includes a parent/guardian signature, and placed in the teacher's ELL Binder. The teacher’s supervisor will periodically review recorded attendance in the binder to ensure that teachers of ELLs have had a minimum of one annual meeting with parents/guardians before the end of the year. Translation/interpretation resources include: in-house bilingual staff, purchased services from an approved DOE vendor, or free DOE Translation and Interpretation over-the-phone services, as well as translation services to assist with parent/guardian correspondence. Teachers may contact Judy Milo, the Parent Coordinator and Language Access Coordinator for assistance. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 4  Parent involvement Our school recognizes and values involvement and participation with the parents and the community. PS 122 encourages broad participation of the families of our students through PTA meetings, parent workshops during the day, after school and in the evening workshops on such topics as English language acquisition, curriculum, math, nutrition, community resources, understanding and analyzing student assessments, using computers and technology, and parenting skills. A full-time Parent Coordinator serves as liaison to the community and provides outreach to engage the families as partners in the success of their children. The Parent Coordinator also maintains a family friendly room to further encourage parent involvement in a nurturing way. The school newspaper, published four times a year, and letters and notices translated in the top three languages (Arabic, Bengali, and Spanish) where possible, establishes ongoing communication between the home and school. The Parent Coordinator maintains an updated distribution list to send relevant information via Broadcast and email, where parents have provided their email accounts. Currently, the Parent Coordinator is working on improving communication with parents through the school's E-Board. Translation/interpretation resources available to parents at these workshops and meetings include: in-house bilingual staff, purchased services from an approved DOE vendor, or free DOE Translation and Interpretation over-the-phone services, as well as translation services to assist with parent/guardian correspondence in the school's top three languages. Judy Milo is both the Parent Coordinator and Language Access Coordinator, ensuring that translation and interpretation services are available to both parents/guardians and teachers. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Anna Aprea, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS122 School DBN: 30Q122 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Anna Aprea Title Principal Alba Carlucci and Michael Pasc Assistant Principal Judy Milo Parent Coordinator Audrey Cheng ENL/Bilingual Teacher Yuli Michael Parent Athena Sfakianos Teacher/Subject Area Ana Reyes Maria Anglo Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Psychologist Other Service Provider Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/8/17 11/8/17 11/8/17 11/8/17 11/8/17 11/8/17 11/8/17 11/8/17 11/8/17 11/8/17 11/8/17 11/8/17 11/8/17 11/8/17 11/8/17 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q122 School Name: PS122 Superintendent: Dr. P. Composto The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Judy Audrey Milo Cheng Parent Coordinator ELL Coordinator YES NO YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At P.S.122Q, written translation needs have been assessed by running a RPOB report from ATS to analyze the number of home languages as per the Home Language Identification Survey forms filled out by the parents of our students. Other ways to collect home language preference data includes Blue Card data (Student Emergency Contact Card), as well as Parent Preferred Language Surveys. We found the major languages spoken other than English to be as follows: Arabic, Bengali, and Spanish. In addition to the analysis of the RPOB and other data sources, we send out a parent survey informing them of the Department of Education’s intention to provide translation and interpretation services for parents who need them. In order to provide parents with appropriate and timely information in a language they can understand, we also ask parents to fill out a survey indicting what language they would need translation or interpretation services. These surveys are collected by the classroom teacher; the goal is to have a complete class set, which is then given to the pupil accounting secretary to update parent language preferences in ATS. The ELL Coordinator uses this information to create a school log, and is 8  updated regularly, to show parents'/guardian preferred language, by class and grade. Every year, each classroom teacher is provided a list of their students' parents/guardian preferred language for oral and written communication. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Arabic Bengali Greek Turkish Polish Punjabi Albanian Portuguese French Nepali 1858 69 60 71 8 0 1 0 1 2 1 0 88.1 3.27 2.84 3.37 0.83 0 0.05 0 0.05 0.09 0.05 0 1849 70 57 73 11 2 1 0 3 2 1 0 0 0 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families List of documents that require translation for our school: Monthly Parent Teacher Conference Announcements-Quarterly 2 to 3 weeks prior to event How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Verbal translation, phone translations and computer based translation service LAC: Written translation provided by DOE T&I Unit 9  Meet the Staff Night-September 3 weeks to one month prior to event Report Cards- Quarterly Quarterly LAC: Written translation provided by in-house school staff or through DOE T&I Unit LAC: Written translation provided by school staff or through DOE T&I Unit Title III Related Programming Notifications- Fall, Winter and Spring 3 weeks to one month prior to program LAC: Written translation provided by in-house school staff New York State Testing Information-Spring 3 weeks to one month prior to exam Parent Workshop Notifications- Monthly Special Meetings- As needed basis School Events- As needed basis 3 weeks to one month prior to event Between 1 week to one month prior to meeting 3 weeks to one month prior to event Emergency Notifications-As needed basis A few days before to same day notification Health Related Information/Notifications-As needed basis Timing varies, depending on urgency LAC: Written translation provided by in-house school staff or through DOE T&I Unit LAC: Written translation provided by in-house school staff LAC: Written translation provided by in-house school staff or through DOE T&I Unit LAC: Written translation provided by in-house school staff or through DOE T&I Unit LAC: Written translation provided by in-house school staff or through DOE T&I Unit LAC: Written translation provided by in-house school staff or through DOE T&I Unit 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Face-to-face meetings held at our school: Monthly Parent Teacher Conferences- 3 weeks to one month prior to event Individual Annual Parent of ELLs Meeting- September-June 3 weeks to one month prior to meeting interpretation service(s)? Secretary and translator provide service Interpretation services provided by in-house school staff, outside vendor, and/or over-the-phone interpretation through DOE T&I Interpretation services provided by in-house school staff and over-the-phone interpretation services through DOE T&I Unit 0  Meet the Staff Night-September 2 to 3 weeks prior to event Open school week-September 2 to 3 weeks prior to event Culture Night/May Parent evening conference to introduce what students need next academic year- May 3 weeks to one month prior to event Tuesday Parent Engagement Day-September-June 3 weeks to one month prior to event Parent Outreach by Guidance counselor-As needed basis 3 weeks to one month prior to event LPT Meetings- As needed basis 3 weeks to one month prior to event IEP Team Meetings-As needed basis 3 weeks to one month prior to event Interpretation services provided by in-house school staff and/or outside vendor Interpretation services provided by in-house school staff Interpretation services provided by in-house school staff and/or outside vendor Interpretation services provided by in-house school staff and/or outside vendor Interpretation services provided by in-house school staff and/or outside vendor Interpretation services provided by in-house school staff and over-the-phone interpretation services through DOE T&I Unit Interpretation services provided by in-house school staff and over-the-phone interpretation services through DOE T&I Unit 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, our school’s communication strategy to reach limited-English-proficient families include the following: -Translated notifications are completed in-house by school staff, DOE T&I Unit, or outside vendor -Blackboard/Broadcast messaging in parent’s preferred language -Over-the-phone interpretation services through in-house school staff, DOE T&I Unit, or outside vendor, if necessary Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 1  During PD training in September, all staff members will be trained on how to use over-the-phone interpretation services. At this training, we will ensure all teachers and staff receive a copy of the "I Speak…" card, which includes the phone number for over-the-phone interpretation services. A copy of the DOE language identification palm card, showing "I speak…" in 32 languages, is given to school security and office staff, so that it can be shown to limited-English proficient parents. After being shown the card, parents/guardians can point to identify their language. After a parent has identified their language on the card, school staff will find a qualified in-house bilingual interpreter or use over-the-phone interpretation services to aid the parent. The number for this service is written on the palm card. In addition, another PD will be provided to all staff in January as a refresher. During Monday PD Training, all staff will be notified ahead of time of available in-house staff or hired translators who will be available for interpretation/translation assistance for Parent-Teacher Conference days in that given month. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS 122 will fulfill parental notification requirements by sending written notification in the covered languages of parents' rights regarding translation and interpretation services and instructions on how to obtain these language assistance services. We have also posted in many of our school's entrances, and in the main office, large posters, in the designated NYC DOE languages, indicating that parents may obtain copies of written notification in the Parent Coordinator's room. In addition to utilizing the NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit over-the-phone-translation service, our school safety plan includes the names of available in-house staff, which is utilized by our staff to help parents communicate their needs and concerns with school administrative offices. These precautions are taken to avoid language barriers between parents and the school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys will be used to gather feedback from parents to monitor the quality and availability of our services. The Parent Coordinator and Language Access Coordinator will schedule a focus group, inclusive of all cultures and languages in our school, to gather additional feedback to improve our language support services to aid parents. 2 
