 24Q128 School Name: P.S. 128 THE LORRAINE TUZZO, JUNIPER VALLEY ELEMENTARY SCHOOL Principal: CAMILLO TURRICIANO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Juniper Valley School 24Q128342400010128 Kindergarten -8 th grade School Number (DBN): 24Q128 69-10 65 th Drive Middle Village, NY 11379 718-326-6210 718-326-6080 Phone Number: Fax: Eva Petrolekas epetrolekas@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Camillo Turriciano Jo Ann Sansivieri Dorothy Dojlidko Jo Ann Sansivieri NA NA NA District Information Geographical District: 24 Superintendent’s Office Address: Madelene Taub-Chan Superintendent: 98-50 50 th Avenue, Corona NY 11368 mchan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-392-3357 Phone Number: 718-592-3770 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens North Lawrence Pendergest FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Camillo Turriciano Jo Ann Sansivieri Dorothy Dojlidko Francine Marsaggi Matilda Fratto Karen Grabler *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/parent Member/ parent Member/parent   Name MadelenaCausi Pam Fabiilli Therese Lindenmeier Eva Petrolekas Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ parent Member/ teacher Member/ teacher Member/ CSA Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS/IS 128 believes in taking a data-driven approach to address the academic and emotional needs of students. Daily collection and analysis of student data, derived from various assessments, help identify and address student weaknesses and target areas for growth. Data is utilized to provide all students with multiple access points, scaffolding, and routines across classrooms as means of ensuring that all learners successfully participate in rigorous and cognitively engaging activities.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S./I.S. 128, located in Middle Village, Queens is a culturally diverse learning community of educators, parents, and students. The school serves approximately 950 children in Grades K-8, located in the main building and annex. The school maintains a dynamic environment, where the students’ academic, artistic, and athletic talents are nurtured. P.S./I.S. 128’s primary goal is to serve the needs of the students in a way that supports their academic success. We believe the level of support we provide students has a direct impact on their ability to succeed. We believe it is our role to provide students with high expectations, as well as the materials and instruction they need to meet those expectations. We aim to support student achievement through standards – based curriculum. Through this curriculum, students are provided with the educational opportunities they need to meet the requirements of New York State assessments, administered in grades 3 to 8 in English Language Arts and Mathematics, as well as 4 th and 8 th grade in Science. We ensure that all learners are provided with the access and opportunity to participate in our curriculum. In addition to our role as educators, we take seriously our responsibility to create an environment where students are able to grow as responsible young adults. We provide students with instruction in conflict resolution, decision making and communication skills. We provide opportunities for students to reflect on their choices. We seek opportunities to help students participate in a caring community as well as celebrate our students’ efforts. Our students’ success is dependent on the partnership we share with their families. We are able to further develop this partnership with PS/IS 128 families by providing services and opportunities that address the academic, social and health needs of the community by establishing partnerships with several organizations. These partnerships include: ● Winter Harvest ● Toys For Tots In addition to the above mentioned collaborations, PS/IS 128 has developed a partnership with Greater Ridgewood Youth Council (GRYC) . GRYC is an after school program that is housed within the school and offers a variety of structured activities at the school as well as in outside community affiliated centers. CHAMPS Sports Program is a service that our school provides as means of supporting our students’ health and wellness and to stay engaged and active during the school year. The morning and afternoon programs offer students sports programs such as soccer, volleyball, track and field, and basketball. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  ELLs and SWDs are exposed to grade level curriculum and tasks. Students are provided with scaffolds and supports throughout the unit of study to help them meet the learning objective of the unit. ELLs and SWDs, who are provided with additional services, are given instruction following the balanced literacy approach. Students with disabilities and English Language Learners participate daily in Readers and Writers Workshops, where prescribed strategies are modeled and help support the individual needs of each student. In addition, instructional materials at ability levels are utilized to scaffold student acquisition of literacy skills. This effective instructional model provides reading and writing strategies that support efforts to make gains on state assessments, but most importantly the model emphasizes Accountable Talk, which helps students take ownership for developing a knowledge base while acquiring the habits of life-long learners. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools, in which our school has made the most progress over the past year, is with regards to the element of Collaborative Teachers. All teacher teams have used data to narrow its instructional focus, to select students, and to identify a skill gap. At the elementary school level, each teacher team is comprised of teachers of the same or across grade levels (horizontal and vertical teams). Each teacher has a select group of students (based on specified criteria) that are tracked and monitored for progress. At the middle school level, each teacher team is comprised of an ELA, math, science, and social studies teacher that teach the same students. Other content area teachers (i.e. Art, Music, Physical Education, etc.) are also part of the teams. Similar to the Elementary school teachers, these teachers select the same students who are part of the target population. Each teacher team completes a reflection sheet, at the conclusion of each meeting, which indicates the team’s findings and next steps for improving student performance. Teacher collaboration and finding have led to in-house professional development and planning sessions that focus on: ● Analyze student data and identifying a target population. ● Analyzing student work samples ● Analyze classroom-level student work. ● Review student performance/achievement outcomes. ● Revise common core-aligned units of study that incorporate opportunities for students to use supporting evidence. ● Researching and implementing teaching practices for target population. ● Analyzing and comparing curricular materials. PS/IS 128 establishes high expectations for all students and provides the support necessary to achieve these expectations. Staff, students, and parents share the same values: an emphasis on academics, clear expectations, and high level of student and parent participation. We convey high expectations to students through personal relationships in which teachers and other school staff communicate to students and parents. Although this is evidenced in the way the school structures and organizes learning, the school will continue to the focus of ensuring that Rigorous Instruction is provided for all students. Incorporating tasks (within all content areas) that promote rigor and critical thinking is our goal for ensuring that all students will be engaged in more challenging assignments that will accelerate their learning, deepen their conceptual understanding, and strengthen their ability to use textual evidence in writing and discussion. Existing units of study will be revised to make adjustments to curriculum, assessment, and instruction. Professional learning sessions will provide opportunities to discuss instructional practices and student performance trends. This time will be used to gain 1  qualitative data through deeper understanding of collective perspectives and by collegial conversations with teachers; which are focused around providing engaging, rigorous tasks. In addition to Rigorous Instruction , our school community will focus on providing Effective School Leadership as well as strengthening Family-Community Ties by engaging families in opportunities to take a greater role in their child’s education. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q128 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 969 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 25 24 40 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 69 54 27 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 36.0% % Attendance Rate 28.3% % Reduced Lunch 4.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.1% 19.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 76.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 0% 23% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 76.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 98% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 73 71 16 95.5% 7.9% 14.0% 0.5% 3.3% 0.4% 4 7% 7.4 65.4% 78% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. There was a 3.3% overall increase of students that were proficient on the NYS Math exam from 2017 to 2018. Students with disabilities had a 5.3% increase and ELL students had a 9.2% decrease. Although the 2018 School Quality Guide indicated that our ELLs and SWDs demonstrated a 0.30 proficiency gain from 2017 to 2018, our school’s lowest third, which encompasses students other than ELLs and SWDs, only had a 0.01 gain. In addition to these findings, student performances on Pre & Post Unit assessments, classroom observations, and End Unit Performance assessments, were comparable to the student data trends. The data, therefore, shows that although some significant progress was made, additional work is needed to address student deficiencies in mathematics. Classroom activities need to be more rigorous to ensure that all students are exposed to deeper mathematical thinking and analysis. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase in the average student proficiency rating for the lowest third (inclusive of ENL and SWD students) in mathematics by 5% on the School's Quality Guide. 4 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students including SWDs and ENLs Daily from September 2018 to June 2019 math teachers SWD teachers All students including SWDs and ENLs Daily from September 2018 to June 2019 All students including SWDs and ENLs Daily from September 2018 to June 2019 ENL providers math teachers SWD teachers ENL providers math teachers SWD teacher ENL providers All students including SWDs and ENLs Daily from September 2018 to June 2019 math teachers SWD teachers ENL providers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Utilizing Mastery Connect software, analysis of student progress on Pre & Post unit assessments for each unit of study will be made. Additional monitoring will be made by analyzing student data trends on Mathletics as well as student work, which will include end unit tasks Units from Go Math!, Glencoe and Carnegie learning will be used in conjunction with Exemplars to design performance based assessments in order to drive data analysis of skills. Staff members will participate in professional learning sessions as well teacher and SWD teams, focusing on various data sources (ex: MOSL, Pre and Post Assessments, student work, etc.) to make informed decisions regarding the instructional approaches that are used in each classroom. Inquiry team focus on a problem of practice to determine methods/instructional practices to address student needs. Tier 1 and tier 2 interventions are provided to students based on formative and summative assessment data. Formative and summative assessments include: - Teacher created assignments and projects - Go Math! and Exemplars end of Unit of Assessments. - Checks for understanding are used at the closing of lessons to assess students understanding of the concept that was taught (exit slips and student work). This data is used to group students and plan for further differentiation. -Plickers and Mastery Connect will be utilized as a tool to monitor and analyze student data. Tier 3 intervention are provided to students in a small group utilizing Mathletics. 5  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Workshops will be offered by the Parent Coordinator, Teachers and Assistant Principals to familiarize the parents the various ways rigor is implemented into daily lessons. September 11, 2018-June 15,2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Material  Carnegie Learning Books  Mathletics  Exemplars Human Resources  The assistant principals provide additional opportunities during workshops/planning sessions scheduled at various times throughout the school year. These workshops are aligned with our school’s professional development plan Lead Instructional Teachers support administration with the development and delivery of specific professional learning cycles.   Consultants from Brienza Advantage, Tools for Learning, and Achievement Strategies will provide professional development to support our initiatives. Teacher Programming  Provisions of daily prep periods as well as weekly grade level team meetings on schedule for teachers to plan.  Weekly Grade Level Meetings: In addition to the weekly Teacher Team meetings (Monday afternoons), teachers at the Elementary school level meet once per week to discuss, plan, and develop next steps in addressing student needs. At the middle school level, teachers are provided with a common prep period as an opportunity to meet and discuss with colleagues within the same content area.  The planning for differentiation can be seen during department meetings, teacher team meetings, and during unstructured, informal ongoing professional discussions that take place at various times and locations throughout the school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 6  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. During observations, administrators will monitor and assess the active engagement of students (September –June). By November 2018, a minimum of 85% of teachers will have received an effective rating on Domain 3C- Student Engagement after the first round of observations. By February 2019, a minimum of 87% of teachers will have received an effective rating on Domain 3C- Student Engagement after the second round of observations. By April 2019, a minimum of 90% of teachers will have received an effective rating on Domain 3C- Student Engagement after the third round of observations. By June 2019, a minimum of 92% of teachers will have received an effective rating on Domain 3C- Student Engagement after the fourth round of observations. 2. Results from formative, summative, and diagnostic assessments will be analyzed to track and monitor student progress (September-November, December- February and March – May). Pre & Post Unit Assessments (September-November) By November 2018, students will have demonstrated a minimum of 5% gains on their math unit post assessments. Pre & Post Unit Assessments (December- February) By February 2019, students will have demonstrated a minimum of 8% gains on their math unit post assessments. Pre & Post Unit Assessments (March – May) By May 2019, students will have demonstrated a minimum of 10% gains on their math unit post assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Reflection sheets will be distributed after professional learning sessions to analyze effectiveness. Mastery Connect and Survey Monkey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Although there was a 4.58 % percent average increase in positive student responses in the area of supportive environment from the 2017 NYC School Survey to the 2018 NYC School survey (which includes only middle school students), 34.7% of students still had a negative response. According to an internal survey administered in June of 2018 to students in grades 3 to 5, the overall percentage of students responding negatively to similar questions was 18.2%. The data suggests that additional actions need to be taken by the school community to ensure a more supportive environment is provided for all students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, there will be a 5% increase in positive student responses in the area of supportive environment in the 2019 NYC School Survey as well as the internal survey administered to students in grades 3 to 5. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). - Provide Professional Learning Opportunity cycles based on individual teacher needs. Teacher surveys will be distributed and analysis of observation reports will be utilized to determine/ identify individual teacher's needs regarding classroom management. Some teachers will attend professional learning opportunities to off-site locations. Some teachers will take part in a professional learning opportunity on Mondays at the school. - Positive behavior intervention support (PBIS) will be implemented at the start of the school year. Activities would include school wide acknowledgement systems that are implemented within classrooms, instructional and non- instructional locations throughout the school. Training will be provided for teachers, paraprofessionals and school aides. Celebration of student success - - 9 All students September 1, 2018 to June 15,2019 Principal Assistant Principal All content area teachers Guidance Counselor Social Worker All students September 1, 2018 to June 15, 2019 Principal Assistant Principal All content area teachers Guidance Counselor Social Worker  Sanford Harmony will be implemented in grades k-6 in order to promote positive healthy relationships among students. Teachers will create classroom environments that are respectful. Lesson plans will include opportunities for students to share, take risks and ultimately feel valued and respected as members of the classroom. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All students September 11, 2018-June 15, 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Social Worker Guidance Counselor K-6 Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator will communicate through email, parent newsletters and workshops. Beginning in September 2018, monthly communication will be provided to parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. *** Principal, Assistant Principals, all content area teachers. Weekly Grade Level Meetings : In addition to the weekly Teacher Team meetings (Monday afternoons), teachers at the Elementary school level meet once per week to discuss, plan, and develop next steps in addressing student needs. At the middle school level, teachers are provided with a common prep period as an opportunity to meet and discuss with colleagues within the grade level. ● The planning for addressing students' needs can be seen during department meetings, teacher team meetings and during unstructured, informal ongoing professional discussions that take place at various times and locations throughout the school. ● The assistant principals provide additional opportunities during workshops/planning sessions scheduled at various times throughout the school year. These workshops are aligned with our school’s professional development plan. - Professional Development Committee: The committee, which consists of teachers of different grade levels and content areas, discuss/evaluate professional development sessions and indicate next steps' according to teachers'/staff needs. - Per diem coverages will be provided for Professional Learning opportunities that occur during the day. 0  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During observations, administrators will monitor and assess the respect and rapport of students within the classroom (September –June). Daily section sheets and behavioral reports, as well as results from pre and post surveys (middle school) will be analyzed to track and monitor student progress (September-November, December- February and March – May). Data will also be collected utilizing the online occurrence reports (OORS). Reflection sheets will be distributed after professional learning sessions to analyze effectiveness (September – June). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher observation reports, daily section sheets, behavioral reports, reflection sheets, and survey monkey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our overall ELA proficiency levels on the NYS exams have increased by 22.6% since 2014 (54.3% in 2014 to 76.9% in 2018). There was also a 14.8% increase with regards to the proficiency levels of students with disabilities, from 2017 to 2018. ELL students, however, demonstrated a decrease of 24.2% in proficiency from 2017 to 2018. In mathematics, there has been an overall increase of 7.7% in our math proficiency levels on the NYS exams (59.5% in 2016 to 67.2% in 2018). Although there was a 9.2% decrease in proficiency regarding our ELL students, there was a 5.3% increase with regards to the proficiency levels of students with disabilities, from 2017 to 2018. According to the school quality guide, however, students in the lowest third (which include ELLs, SWDs, and general education students) only made a gain of 0.05 in ELA proficiency (from 2017 to 2018) and 0.01 in Math proficiency (from 2017 to 2018). This data indicates that although significant gains have been made, students in the lowest third need to make additional progress. An increase of student progress will be a direct result of improved pedagogy. We have identified a need to develop consistency in teacher practices by establishing a strong foundation of school wide instructional goals. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will participate in at least 2 rounds of collaborative inquiry across grade levels, and research a problem of practice to determine effective methods/instructional practices that will address student needs. This will be evident in the weekly analysis of Inquiry Team planning and findings templates completed by each teacher team. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff members will participate in inquiry sessions as well teacher teams including SWD and ENL teams, focusing on various data sources (ex: MOSL, Pre and Post Assessments, student work, etc.) to make informed decisions regarding the instructional approaches that are used in each classroom. Inquiry team focus on a problem of practice to determine methods/instructional practices to address student needs. Teachers in grades k-8 September 15,2018- June 15, 2019 Principal Assistant Principal All Content Areas All content area teachers will apply specific instructional practice and administer pre and post assessments to monitor the instructional practices effectiveness. Teachers in grades k-8 September 9 2018-June 28, 2019 Principal Assistant Principal All Content areas - - 3b – Parent and Family Engagement - - - - - - How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Workshops will be offered by the Parent Coordinator, Teachers and Assistant Principals to familiarize the parents with the various forms of differentiation that are utilized in the classroom. September 11, 2018-June 15,2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Provisions of daily prep periods as well as weekly grade level team meetings on schedule for teachers to plan. ● Ready Gen and Code X. Provision of daily prep periods as well as weekly grade level team meetings on schedule for teachers to plan. - Carnegie learning, Glencoe Math resources, Go Math! and Mathletics. Provision of daily prep periods as well as weekly grade level team meetings on schedule for teachers to plan 3  ● Weekly Grade Level Meetings : In addition to the weekly Teacher Team meetings (Monday afternoons), teachers at the Elementary school level meet once per week to discuss, plan, and develop next steps in addressing student needs. At the middle school level, teachers are provided with a common prep period as an opportunity to meet and discuss with colleagues within the same content area. ● The planning for differentiation can be seen during department meetings, teacher team meetings and during unstructured, informal ongoing professional discussions that take place at various times and locations throughout the school. ● The assistant principals provide additional opportunities during workshops/planning sessions scheduled at various times throughout the school year. These workshops are aligned with our school’s professional development plan. - Achieve 3000, Mathletics, Lexia. - Mastery Connect: data collection Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During observations, administrators will monitor and assess the active engagement of students (September –June). Results from formative, summative, and diagnostic assessments will be analyzed to track and monitor student progress (September-November, December- February and March – May). Reflection sheets will be distributed after professional learning sessions to analyze effectiveness (September –June). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. reflection sheets, survey monkey and mastery connect Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher observation reports of classroom lessons indicate the need to address specific instructional practices surrounding the use of questioning within the classroom setting. The school-wide average for the 2016-2017 school year was 2.79 in Domain 3B: Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques. In 2017-2018, the school-wide average was 2.92. Although this was an increase of 0.13, 10.4% of teachers observed received a rating of 2.50 or lower in 3B during the 2017-2018 school year. Based on these findings, continued differentiated professional learning is required in order to provide individualized targeted support for staff members. The professional learning sessions will focus on improving teacher practice with regards to the use of a variety of questions and discussion techniques in order to challenge students cognitively and engage them in meaningful discussions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers that received a 2.50 or lower in Domain 3B will demonstrate a 3% increase on their overall domain rating, which will be evidenced by teacher observation reports focusing on 3b (Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques). 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All content area teachers will apply specific instructional practices and will be provided with professional learning opportunities that focus on the different types of questions that could be utilized during a lesson (convergent and divergent) in order to challenge students cognitively and promote student discussion. Teachers in grades K-8 September 9,2018- June 28, 2019 Principal Assistant Principals All Content Area Teachers Staff members will participate in professional learning sessions as well teacher teams including ELL and SWD teams, focusing on the different types of questions (ex: convergent and divergent, DOK.) to make informed decisions regarding the instructional approaches that are used in each classroom. Provide Professional Learning Opportunity cycles based on individual teacher needs. Teacher surveys will be distributed and analysis of observation reports will be utilized to determine/ identify individual teacher's needs regarding Professional learning. Some teachers will be sent to off-site locations. Some teachers will take part in a professional learning opportunity on Mondays at the school. Teachers in grades k-8 September 9,2018-June28, 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Teachers in grades k-8 September 9,2018- June 28, 2019 All content area teachers Principal Assistant Principals All content area teachers - 3b – Parent and Family Engagement - - - How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be provided by the Parent Coordinator, Teachers and Assistant Principals to provide parents an opportunity to provide a window into classroom practices. September 9, 2018- June 28,2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 6  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. **Principal, Assistant Principals, all content area teachers. ● Professional Development Committee: The committee, which consists of teachers of different grade levels and content areas, discuss/evaluate professional development sessions and indicate next steps according to teachers’/staff needs. ● Weekly Grade Level Meetings : In addition to the weekly Teacher Team meetings (Monday afternoons), teachers at the Elementary school level meet once per week to discuss, plan, and develop next steps in addressing student needs. At the middle school level, teachers are provided with a common prep period as an opportunity to meet and discuss with colleagues within the same content area. -Per Diem coverages will be provided for Professional Learning opportunities that occur during day. -Consultants from Brienza, Sue Beers and Bob Darnell, Tools for Learning and Mastery Connect will be utilized to support Administration and Staff members. ● The planning for differentiation can be seen during department meetings, teacher team meetings and during unstructured, informal ongoing professional discussions that take place at various times and locations throughout the school. ● The assistant principals provide additional opportunities during workshops/planning sessions scheduled at various times throughout the school year. These workshops are aligned with our school’s professional development plan. ● A schedule for conducting teacher observations and providing immediate effective feedback, using the research-based rubric, is followed by the instructional cabinet throughout the course of the school year. ● Post observation conferences (between teachers and assistant principals) take place after each observation is conducted; this provides feedback as well as facilitate discussions. ● The instructional cabinet focus on the development and implementation of a coherent PD plan for teachers that integrates the selected components of the research-based rubric. ● Differentiated professional development sessions and provide opportunities for teacher inter-visitation. ● Instructional lead teachers plan with assistant principals targeted professional development sessions, based on needs of teachers and departments. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7  Principal and Assistant Principals will use Advance to record and document teacher growth from previous observations. (September to June) Provision to daily prep periods as well as weekly grade team meetings on schedule for teachers to plan. (daily for September to June) Reflection sheets will be distributed after professional learning sessions to analyze effectiveness. The implementation of topics discussed during these sessions will be monitored and assessed through observations. _ By February 26, 2019, at the conclusion of the teacher observation cycle 2, observation reports will demonstrate progress in implementation of instructional practices from cycle 1. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Observation Reports, survey monkey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Although there was a 1.5% increase (79% to 80.5%) in parent responses that they have volunteered/ participated in events throughout the school year from the 2017 NYC School Survey to the 2018 NYC survey, we would like to continue to provide parents opportunities to become stakeholders in their children's education. As such, we will ensure that all families receive information and have full access to workshops and programs. The increase in parental involvement will have an impact on student classroom grades as well NYS exam performance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of 10% on the Learning Environment Survey indicating that a greater number of parents who have volunteered and/or participated in school events and activities as evidenced by attendance and participation at school wide events and celebrations. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Support will be provided to parents and families on Parent Engagement Tuesdays and throughout the year by: Parents of students in grades K-8 September 2018-June 2019 All teachers Principal - Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement in English Language Arts and Math. Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in the planning and decision making process in order to support of the education of their children. Administrators and teachers will provide timely, appropriate information to families about instructional programs, events and activities taking place in the school. Information will be provided to parents about school related programs, meetings and other activities in a format and language that parents can understand. School Messenger and the School Website will be utilized to disseminate information. Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home. Provide parents opportunities to participate in Family Read Alouds, Career Day and Book Clubs. - 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Parents of students in grades K-8 September 2018-June 2019 All teachers Principal Parents of students in grades K-8 September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator All teachers Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Teachers - - - If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Provide professional development opportunities for school staff to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our community. September 2018-June 2019. 0  All teachers Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, SLT members and Parent Association President - Principal, Assistant Principals, in collaboration with SLT and PA President will assess the needs of parents and/or concerns to ensure that information for various activities and events is disseminated on a timely manner. - Teachers will support the distribution of flyers and other school notices. Teachers will help facilitate workshop sessions. -Parent Coordinator will coordinate and facilitate parent communication of events. - School Messenger will be used to facilitate communication. - Survey Monkey will be utilized to gain parental input. - Achieve 3000 and My Lexia will be utilized to allow parents to gain an insight on student reading levels. -Parent engagement sessions and ELL parent workshops will be provided to support parents. - Title III Part A per session will be provided for teachers and administration. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. - By January 2019, parents will be surveyed to determine if they were invited and attended workshops. - By June 2019, parental invites to workshops and attendance will be assessed. 1  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. reflection sheets and survey monkey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Formative and Summative Assessments Skill Assessment Log NYS ELA scores Plickers Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tier 1: Small group and tutoring During the day and after school - Small group instruction within the classroom - Ready Gen: If, then differentiated reading strategies - Code X: direct instruction of vocabulary words Mastery Connect (pre and post assessment data collection) (classroom data collection) Tier 2 and 3: - Achieve 3000 (online reading comprehension support) - Great Leaps (daily fluency intervention) - My Lexia(provides explicit, systematic, personalized learning in the six areas of reading instruction) -Mind Play ( interactive lessons with tiered instruction and remediation) - MCI: Making Connections 3 (targeted literacy intervention focusing on explicit and direct comprehension instruction) - SPIRE (intensive reading intervention for non-readers) Tier 1: Small group and tutoring During the day and after school - Small group instruction within the classroom Mathematics Formative and Summative Assessments Skill Assessment Log NYS Math scores Science Mastery Connect Skill Assessment Log Teacher recommendation Social Studies ELA scores - Go Math!: Tier 1 differentiated strategies -Carnegie Learning Manipulatives - Visual Aides Tier 3: - Mathletics: provides standard aligned lessons that build problem solving skills Tier 1 - Small group instruction provided in the classroom - Analysis of literacy skills Tier1 Small group During the day Small group During the day Mastery Connect Skill Assessment Log - Small group instruction provided in the classroom Teacher recommendation - Analysis of literacy skills 4 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher and parent recommendation - Group Sessions - One to one sessions Grade level intervention small group During the day - 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 8 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  Supplies, materials (books, pencils) 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $4154.00 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. NA 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). NA Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 8  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. NA 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 9  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/IS 128 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS/IS 128 will support parents and families of students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 1  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Parent Involvement Policy, parents of participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association , as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team and the Parent Association. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; 2 Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams and Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association); ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/IS 128, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 3  ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 4  I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 5  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 2 2 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: At this time, this is the only program that will run during the title III sessions. -TEAM Toolkits (Teaching ELLs for Academic Language Mastery) -Daily Language Review books (student and teacher guides) -Headphones with microphones (RAZ Kids) -RAZ kids for comprehension (online reading subscription) -BrainPOP ELL for English grammar and vocabulary (online subscription) -Lenovo Tab 2 tablets Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: 1. Rationale: To support general education teachers in integrating ELLs fully into their classrooms, we will offer professional development to all classroom teachers of ELLs in grades k to 5 (and ELA teachers in grades 6 to 8) in in the SIOP model of integrated ENL instruction. This will provide an opportunity for all teachers of ELLs to study a research-based model of instruction that allows for integration of English language development within content-area classrooms. This will support the Title III program's goals of increasing ELLs' reading comprehension, academic language and writing skills. It will increase students' capacity for success in the Title III program by ensuring there is a common understanding among all teachers of ELLs of the best practices and research-supported methodologies for increasing ELL achievement. There will be a direct link between classroom instruction and Title III instruction, as all teachers will study, employ and discuss specific strategies from the SIOP model, both during school and in the after-school program. 2. Teachers to receive training: All classroom teachers of ELLs (K-5), ELA teachers (6-8) and 2 ENL teachers (12 teachers total) 3. Schedule and Duration: Teachers will receive training during 2 professional development sessions for 1 hour each before school in October. Teachers who work with ELLs will be invited to meet from 7:00 to 8:00 a.m. to discuss strategies outlined in the SIOP book: "Making Content Comprehensible for Elementary Learners," as well as implementation of those strategies in the 8  Part C: Professional Development students' classrooms. We will invite teachers in Grades K-8 who work with ELLs to be part of the professional development teacher team. Teachers will be paid per session for their attendance. Budget allows for `10 classroom teachers (total) and 2 ENL teachers to attend a total of 2 study sessions. Teachers that attend will be provided with a copy of the book during the meeting. Attendance sheets will be stored in binder in the assistant principals office. 4. Topics to be covered: The following chapters will be part of an in-depth discussion: -Lesson preparation (SIOP components 1 through 6) -Comprehensible Input (SIOP features 10 through 12) -Strategies (SIOP features 13 through 15) -Issues of Reading, RTI, and Special Education for English Learners 5. Name of Providers: Erin Kilbride and Sarah Komins , ENL certified Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Our Title III parent engagement activities will provide parents with important information regarding expectations, informational resources and ways to support their child at home. The parents of our ELLs often inquire about programs they can use or how they can support their child at home. In order for families to continue fostering the development of English at home, we will provide ELLs and their families with access to a family edition of Brain Pop ESL. Brain Pop ESL reinforces vocabulary, grammar, pronunciation, reading comprehension, and writing skills through short animated movies and interactive games. Schedule and duration: Informational meetings will be held the first Tuesday of the month for students and parents. Regularly scheduled meetings will be held beginning on November 13, 2018 for 1 hour each month Topics to be covered: -Expectations and information regarding important dates and events during the school year. -Supporting Language Development through Brain Pop ESL. -Supporting Reading Comprehension and decoding through Raz-Kids and My Lexia. In addition, we will also provide parents with strategies parents can use when reading with their child at home. -Informational meeting about the NYSESLAT -Additionally, we provide parents with a survey (translated in their preferred language) at the beginning of each school year, in order to gauge what topics parents are interested in or need support with. The results of this survey will inform the last 4 parent meetings of the year. We will provide parents with support in their native language in order to follow up on these surveys, encourage participation, and at the meetings themselves, through the use of the language line and bilingual staff members. -These parent engagement activities will support the title III program by fostering a relationship between school and home, and encouraging parents to support their children's English literacy growth, by showing them how to use the BrainPop and Raz-Kids programs at home. 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities 4. Name of provider: E. Kilbride and S. Komins, ENL teachers. 5. Parents will be notified through written invitations in advance of each meeting. These invitations will be translated into each parents' preferred language. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $8,656.20  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff $2,473.20 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Direct Instruction: $7,341.07 -2 Teachers. The duration will be 33 weeks at 1.5 hours each session. A total of 33 instructional sessions. Teacher salary (with fringe)=$55.23. Total Teacher Salary=$5,467 Supervisor Salary (with fringe)= $56.79 Total supervisor salary + $1,874.07 Total direct instruction salary= $7,341.07 Professional Development: $1,325.52 -K-8 Professional Development 10 Teachers+ 2 ESL Teachers for 2 hour/session: $1,325.52 Total Salary: $8,666.59 Direct Instruction Materials= $2,410.31 -RAZ Kids subscription: $109.95/year (online running records and tracking of student progress). -BrainPOP ELL subscription: $150/year (online English language grammar and vocabulary acquisition support). -TEAM Toolkits: $1362.88 (1 Kit for levels AA-B, $417.95, plus 1 0  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Kit for levels C-E, $4`17.95, plus extra 5-packs of each level of student book, $87.73 x 6= $526.38) ISBNs: 978`1524003647 (1), 9781524003654 (1), 9781524003678 (1), 9781524003685 (1), 9781524003692 (`1), 9781524003708 (1), 9781524003715 (1), 9781524003722 (1) -20 Noot products K11 Foldable Stereo Tangle-Free 3.5mm Jack Wired Cord On-Ear Headset for Children (for use with BrainPopELL and Raz-Kids programs): $399.80 ($19.99 x 20) -Daily Language Review: 4 teacher guides (2 grades per teacher)=87.96, 8 5-packs of student books=239.92; total=$327.88 -DK Press Bilingual Visual Dictionaries, for reference: (1 Polish, 1 Russian, 1 Arabic, 1 Spanish)=$59.80 Total Materials= $2,410.31 Parent Engagement=$1,275 Supplemental materials for families to learn English. Brain Pop ESL family edition subscription: 15 families at $85 each = $1,275 $12,351.90 Educational Software (Object Code 199) $1,236.60 Travel Other TOTAL $12,366 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name P.S./I.S. 128 Borough Queens School Number 128 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Camillo V. Turriciano Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Erin Kilbride Teacher/Subject Area Patricia Karl Teacher/Subject Area Sarah Komins Related-Service Provider Elizabeth Caba Superintendent Assistant Principal Eva Petrolekas Coach School Counselor Irene Papatsos Parent Dawn Camus Parent Coordinator Melissa Phillips Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Elizabeth Caba, IEP Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 969 2 Total number of ELLs 42 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.33%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 0 3 0 2 0 4 0 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. Fountas and Pinnell Running Records- A running record can provide information about a ELLs' print awareness, phonological awareness, comprehension, vocabulary and narrative skills. The data from running records can guide our instruction for ELLs by providing insights about their academic English language development in terms of reading (decoding and comprehension), speaking and listening (syntax and semantics). As a result, we may determine the need to support a student's vocabulary development or provide language stems to support them during academic discourse with their peers 2. Teacher Created assessments: These assessments provide Information about key reading comprehension skills and fluency, writing proficiency, language use and content knowledge. We also analyze data to determine the standards, objectives and skills individual students have mastered or need support in. The data allows us to revise unit plans to fit the needs of our ELLs. We can adjust content and language objectives for a unit as needed. When planning daily instruction for ELLs, we can revisit b data to determine standards that need to be addressed during a unit of study .3. Teacher Created Periodic ENL Assessments: These assessments, created by the ENL teachers, give data multiple times throughout the year on students' language proficiency in 3  all modalities, as well as key foundational reading and writing skills. 4. Plickers: This technology-driven assessment allows teachers to gather on-the-spot data about students' mastery of the lesson-specific skills. Plickers provides data that helps us place ELLs in appropriate learning groups when revisiting a standard or skill. Therefore, ELLs are placed in fluid groups according to their strengths and weaknesses. - 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have created structures to allot time in order to analyze data and plan lessons that address the needs of our ELLs. We utilize our Monday afternoons to analyze data and instruction. During the first half of professional development time, teachers engage in inquiry groups, consisting of both general education and ENL teachers. During this time, they analyze data gathered from assessments and discuss patterns revealed, research solutions, and implement them, in order to more effectively drive instruction through collaboration. The second half of our time is devoted to workshops. The ENL providers lead a cycle of professional development for staff members that introduce teachers to the Bilingual Common Core Progressions and model language scaffolds as they relate to the standards and students' proficiency levels. The workshops provide teachers of ELLs strategies to engage ELLs in rigorous, grade level tasks. Furthermore, ENL teachers attend common planning time with grade level teachers. ENL teachers provide suggestions on ways to make content accessible to ELLs of all proficiency levels as well as scaffolds to support language needs during the work period. Lastly, we 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? -Teacher-created ENL Baseline: At the beginning of each school year, an ENL baseline that aligns to the NYESLAT is administered to all students. This is used as a language proficiency baseline for the year. The above-mentioned formative assessments are used in each unit of instruction to gauge students' progress. Practice NYSESLAT assessments given at the end of the year, as well as anecdotal data taken during the administration of the NYSESLAT serve as summative assessments for students' language growth throughout the school year. -Teacher Created Baselines: These assessments provide Information about key reading comprehension skills and fluency, writing proficiency, language use and content knowledge. We also analyze baseline data to determine the standards, objectives, skills and specific modalities where ELLs need the most support. Baseline data allows us to revise unit plans to fit the needs of our ELLs. We can adjust content and language objectives for a unit as needed. When planning daily instruction for ELLs, we can revisit baseline data to determine standards that need to be addressed during a unit of study. -Teacher Created Summative Assessments: ELL students take summative assessments at the end of each unit, which measure their growth in each modality as well as mastery of the Common Core Standards. This data is analyzed and compared to baseline data to measure students' progress, and determine remaining areas of need for the next unit of instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At the beginning of the year, we use results from the previous year's summative assessments (NYS ELA and NYSESLAT) as an initial step to determine the need for intervention. In addition to these assessments, we consider other factors that would contribute to a student’s performance. The ELL Data and Analysis Tool is a useful report that provides more in depth information about a student such as: hold over status, years of service (Ex. long term ELLs), SIFE status, or SWD’s. During grade level meetings, teachers share information and devise an action plan for the student. As summative data is collected at the end of each unit, students who are not meeting the grade-level standards are pinpointed. We use an RTI framework as the main structure to address interventions for students with areas of need, once the summative data has been analyzed. For students who continue to score below the accepted benchmark, a second stage begins with strong core instruction (Tier1), wherein students are provided with AIS, monitoring consistently to confirm how at risk students are responding to instruction. A student is referred to the Pupil Personnel Team (PPT), if a student is not making adequate progress through AIS. Members review the teacher's data and then make a decision about next steps. Follow-up is made by team members and data is reviewed to determine if the current interventions are beneficial for the student. 4  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] -Implementing the RtI framework for ELLs begins with gathering data about a student’s knowledge and literacy skills in L1. During the initial interview with the student and parent, we inquire about the child’s prior school experience: Was instruction in L1 or L2? What are the student’s strengths and weaknesses-ELA, Math, Science? If the child is beginning school for the first time in the United States, we request a report card from the native country.-In addition, we can gather data about a student’s L1 in Spanish by using the Spanish LAB-R -ELLs' English literacy is tracked using intervention computer software programs such as RazKids and MyLexia. These programs provide specific data about each child's literacy progress, including areas of strength and weakness, vocabulary development, reading level and grade equivalent, and progress in individual literacy skills. The data is analyzed on a weekly basis, in order to identify targeted interventions for specific students, based on skills gaps in the programs. Once a teacher determines that a student is consistently scoring below the accepted grade-level benchmarks (using the above-mentioned formative and summative assessments), the teacher uses the below RTI framework to provide interventions for that student.-Tier I for ELLs consists of • Promoting vocabulary and language development by providing ongoing and appropriate instruction in academic language use in the native language and/or in English. • Scaffold language and content for students to respond by providing sentence stems, visuals, native language support, graphic organizers and other individual scaffolds, and provide opportunities for appropriate peer learning, including peer pairing and small-group instruction. -Tier 2 for ELLs consist of• Provide intensive reading interventions to ELLs demonstrating low reading skills when needed in small groups. Students are provided with support using the Fundations phonics program to increase reading skills. In addition, students who need Tier 2 support are invited to after school programs to develop reading skills. These students are given access to MyLexia and RazKids intensive online reading programs and participate in small group instruction. -Tier 3• ELLs who are significantly behind in reading require highly intensive reading intervention. ELLs in this group receive AIS, using the Spire interventional reading support program. Beginner/Newcomers also use the Rosetta Stone program which promotes all areas of language development. - Student progress is measured in each level of the RTI framework using the above-mentioned formative assessments, such as Fountas and Pinell, teacher-created assessments, and Mastery Connect data trackers. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. To evaluate the success of the program we use data from the NYSESLAT, the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT), NYS ELA/Math Exams, Fountas and Pinnell Running Record levels. Using the EDAT, we were able to analyze the data from the NYSESLAT, and NYS ELA and Math Exams to evaluate our ENL program. We found that our students performed well overall on all three assessments. 15 of our 42 ELLs last year (36%) transitioned from ELL to former ELL status, either by reaching the Commanding level on the NYSESLAT, or by reaching Expanding and scoring a 3 or 4 on the NYS ELA exam. 35% of our ELLs scored a 3 or a 4 on the ELA, and only 8% of ELLs scored below the 25th percentile in ELA. The results were similar in Math. 25% of our ELLs scored a 3 or a 4 on the Math exam, and only 4% of our ELLs scored below the 25th percentile in Math. We had 0 students regress last year on the NYSESLAT, meaning all students either maintained the same level or moved up. 15 ELLs remained at the same proficiency level, while the remaining 27 (64% of ELLs) moved up one or two levels. By analyzing the modality data of the NYSESLAT, we found that our largest area of weakness is in writing, with 10% of ELLs scoring low in that area. Accordingly, we have decided to adjust our ENL program this year to focus more on writing, by adding a narrative writing unit into our standalone ENL classes. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The structure we have in place to disseminate the findings from our outcome assessments begins during the initial grade level meetings each school year. Previous year NYSESLAT results and ELA/Math exam scores are disseminated to all teachers by the ENL teachers and administrators, respectively at this meeting. NYSESLAT student scores are broken down by modality, in order to inform classroom instruction by all teachers. We then compare and analyze this data collaboratively to determine what program adjustments should be made (for example which subjects should be collaboratively co-taught between ENL and subject-area teachers. Running records are done in collaboration between the general education and ENL teachers 3 times annually, and the results of these assessments (as well as other formative assessments) are discussed during the Monday inquiry time, in order to evaluate the effectiveness of, and make changes to, our school's literacy and ENL programs. 5  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Results from NYSITELL and spring 2017 NYSESLAT are used to determine the number of units of study students receive in integrated and standalone ENL.-Integrated ENL: Students will be grouped by grade level and ELLs of mixed proficiency levels will be placed in the same homeroom, allowing for scheduling of Integrated units of study. If a new student enrolls and there is not sufficient space, students will be brought from their homeroom to classroom with the majority of ELL students. The Integrated ENL units of study will be co-taught by a certified ENL teacher and a Common Branch/Content area teacher or by a dually certified ENL/Common Branch (Content Teacher)-Stand-alone ENL units of study will be delivered by a certified ENL teacher. Students will be grouped by grade level, and will be mixed proficiency level (encompassing entering, emerging and transitioning students in the same class). These groups will comply with the maximum allowable grade span of being two contiguous grades. Currently, our students are grouped as follows: K, 1-2, 3-4, 5-6 and 7-8 b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Instructional minutes are calculated by using the table: Part 154-2 (K-8) English as a New Language (ENL) Units of Study and Staffing Requirements table. We use the table to determine the units of study each student will receive as per their proficiency level. Students will be provided stand alone and/or integrated ENL services accordingly. Stand-Alone ENL is instruction to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content areas. It is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. A student may not receive stand-alone ENL in lieu of core content area instruction. Integrated ENL is instruction to build language skills through content area instruction. Integrated ENL instruction 1. Entering students receive 2 units of study (360 minutes) that consist of 1 unit of stand-alone (180 minutes) and 1 unit of ENL/ELA (180 minutes) 2. Emerging students receive 2 units of study (360 minutes) that consist of 1 unit of stand-alone (180 minutes) and 1 unit of Integrated ENL/ELA (180 minutes) 3. Transitioning students receive 1 unit of study (180 minutes) of Integrated ENL/ELA 4. Expanding students receive 1 unit of study (180 minutes) of Integrated ENL/ELA or Content Areas 6  5. Commanding students receive .5 units of study (90 minutes ) of Integrated ENL in ELA 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content Delivery of Instruction for ELLs: Content is delivered in our co-taught integrated ENL/ELA and Standalone ENL programs using the workshop model, wherein students are gradually released through teacher modeling, guided practice and then independent work. Scaffolds for both language and content are provided to ELLs in each subject area, as described below.All ELA classes for ELLs are taught by licensed teachers and all ELLs receive their mandated ENL periods with licensed ENL teachers. Scaffolded lessons are used daily to ensure academic growth. Specific strategies used in our ELA classes are: chunking of texts, color-coding texts for easier navigation of complex texts and increased comprehension. ELA and ENL teachers also target and scaffold vocabulary instruction, use double entry journals, mind mirrors, and anticipatory guides. Additionally, discussion prompts and various levels of questioning are implemented to effectively engage students in collaborative discussions. ENL teachers work collaboratively with content-area teachers to create language objectives which are aligned to skills and content objectives for the ELA units of study. These language objectives are designed to enable English Language Learners to choose language which expresses ideas precisely and concisely. Additionally, ENL teachers and co-teachers use the Bilingual Common Core Progressions to determine appropriate scaffolds for the students in their classes based on data from formative and summative assesments. These scaffolds may include sentence frames, visuals, graphic organizers, etc. to ensure that ELL students are able to master the same content and skills as the rest of the students. Mathematics:In mathematics, instruction to English Language Learners is delivered through a standards-based curriculum that is driven by the Common Core State Standards. ELL students are expected to follow the same GoMath curriculum as general education students. Teachers will assess ELLs' mathematical skills using formal and informal classroom assessments, and plan accordingly to meet the needs of those students through the use of the workshop model and scaffolds. Teachers support ELLs academic language development through the use of mathematical conversation groups, and the "stop and discuss" method, partnering them with native English speakers to provide good models and encourage discussion. Instructional Strategies and Grade Level Materials Utilized: Mathematicsa) Grouping students by data from pre tests, post tests, quizzes, Plickers, exit cards, and homework to provide students, with a scaffolded activity that is designed to meet them at their individual needs. Small groups of students are able to work with the teacher to re-teach the day's material and provide additional vocabulary or explanations of mathematical concepts.b) Classroom interactive word walls will highlight important math vocabulary words. These word walls are created with the students and are organized with the definition of the word, a picture of the word, and an example of the word. c) Teacher-student conferencing is used to assist the student with individual weaknesses in order for the student to improve. d) Additional visual aids and manipulatives are used in math lessons with ELL students, in order to accelerate their understanding of concepts. Social Studies: In social studies, teachers will apply specific instructional practices to their ELL students and will be provided with professional development opportunities that focus on:• Driving whole-class and small-group instruction using data from Mastery Connects to understand the needs of ELL students • Students are grouped according to their academic/instructional abilities as well as literacy skills, using data from Plickers and on-the-spot Mastery Connect data trackers• Classroom Differentiation: ELL students’ academic needs are addressed during the work period by providing all students the same work period task, but providing scaffolds such as sentence stems, additional vocabulary, checklists, native language support, and graphic organizers to ELL students as a means of helping them complete the task.• Literacy in Content Areas- Emphasis on ELL instruction in reading and writing skills needed for students to perform complex literacy tasks as well as develop proficiency in reading comprehension. Literacy strategies/techniques such as questioning, identifying main idea, finding evidence to support a conclusion, and context clues are embedded in unit planning and assessments. • Common Core State Standards – aligned units of study that incorporate opportunities for ELL students to read and analyze informational texts and write opinions and arguments in response. • Interim and End Unit Tasks are aligned with CCLS and incorporate literacy skills to assess progress throughout the units. Science: Teachers focus on the skills English Language Learners need to understand concepts and skills related to science. In addition, we use various ELL 7  strategies to help make the content comprehensible for students. For example, Listening – teachers speak slowly, distinctly, and write down key terms for the students; Visualization – use graphic organizers, charts, graphs and figures to help further the students’ understanding; Interpersonal strategies – teachers have group projects and cooperative learning partner with strong English speakers, and they also have students participate in Think/Pair/Share whenever possible to promote discussion ; Encourage participation – Teachers build solid structures for learning through consistent routines and rituals, they map out the units by giving them their own unit map, and the teachers relate to the students’ prior knowledge and utilize it within the lessons; Laboratory – teachers incorporate many hands-on activities to assist with building knowledge; Demonstrations teachers demonstrate clear, procedural steps in order to participate in hands-on activities, they model laboratory activities and give pictorial guides to complete the tasks; Reading and Writing – teachers use Close Reading to increase Science comprehension and have students jigsaw to chunk down further and we are giving students many opportunities to practice writing with initial, interim and final writing pieces in each of the units on each grade; Instruction – teachers have been trained and utilize wait time for students to give them time to process and respond to questions; Vocabulary – teachers use many Language-based science games, picture glossaries and cognates (where science terms are analyzed and identified in many languages), and teachers have the students notify them whenever they recognize a new term that is pronounced or written similarly in their first language, and teachers keep interactive word walls which include pictures. Science units are analyzed collaboratively with classroom teachers, science subject teachers and ENL teachers, to ensure the lessons meet the needs of ELLs, including: providing native language support wherever possible, providing appropriate vocabulary and visual aids for comprehension purposes, providing appropriate note-taking devices, chunking tasks and providing step-by-step instructions, and grouping ELL students with native English speaking peers in order to encourage discussion and build academic language. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish-speaking ELLs are administered a Spanish LAB Examination upon initial entry. This gives the school some measure of their literacy levels in the native language. Research shows that students who are competent in their native language will learn English faster. Since we do not have a bilingual program at the moment, we do not administer the ELE and the Chinese Reading Test. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Plan for SIFEAfter giving new students the NYSITELL exams, interviewing them, looking up reading scores in ATS if available, we will have a better idea of students’ levels of literacy. Using leveled libraries in the classroom provides students with the flexibility and freedom they need to read books that are on the current level. Classroom grouping will provide for differentiation of instruction so that the teacher may focus on the special skills targeted for improvement. These students present special challenges, since they must be socialized as well as educated. We encourage these students to participate in our Title III program, where they receive additional support. We are using Title III funds to implement parent workshops. This creates a bridge between the home and the school, and hopefully encourages both student and parent to try to communicate in English outside the school community. We support the teachers of SIFE with professional development, curriculum development meetings, and teacher team meetings. During these meetings, teachers are presented with strategies that will help these students achieve their utmost potential. Inquiry team data is presented as well and it is utilized to plan instruction. b. Plan for NewcomersNewcomer students are given intensive native language support when they first arrive, from the ENL teacher and any staff in the building who speak the student's home language. Tablets are provided for these students to use in the classroom, in order facilitate the use of translation. These students receive four extra periods of ENL per week in a standalone small group with the ENL teacher. The newcomers will be provided with services that will help them transition academically, emotionally, and culturally. Our findings indicate that newcomers in K-2 need strong support in phonics and letter recognition. Upon entering Grade 1, three students in grade 2 did not attend Kindergarten. In order to close the achievement gap, these students began using the My Lexia online program. This program is beneficial for ELLs because instruction is delivered in a repetitive and visual way. In 8  addition, instruction can be delivered in other languages, such as Arabic. Our newcomer students in grades 3-8 have deomonstated basic reading and writing skills. In order to increase vocabulary and develop their writing skills and sentence structure, students will utilize the Rosetta Stone program. c. Developing:Our developing ELLs are held to the same rigor as their English-speaking counterparts. We will support their needs as ELLs who, based upon individual data analysis. Scaffolded lessons are used daily to ensure academic growth. Our findings indicate that our developing ELLs strengths are in the areas of Speaking and Writing. Therefore, we will focus on developing our ELLs Listening and Reading skills. In order to strengthen reading skills, we will use the following strategies in our ELA classes: chunking of texts, color-coding texts for easier navigation of complex texts and increased comprehension. ELA and ENL teachers also target and scaffold vocabulary instruction, use double entry journals, mind mirrors, and anticipatory guides. In order to develop ELLs listening skills, we implement the following strategies: "Turn and Talks"-stopping periodically during a lesson to assess understanding and allow ELLs to discuss what they have learned, using focus prompts to help ELLs listen for specific information. Additionally, students are given discussion prompts and various levels of questioning are implemented to effectively engage students in collaborative discussions. ENL teachers are implementing the use of language objectives which are aligned to skills and content objectives for the ELA units of study. These language objectives are designed to enable English Language Learners to choose language which expresses ideas precisely and concisely. d. Long-Term ELLs All ELLs will be given the opportunity to participate in our extended day program, which provides small group tutoring for students at risk. We also have an after-school Title III program in ENL. The Title III program places special emphasis on literacy skills to help long-term ELLs succeed. In this program, we not only focus on literacy skills, but we also provide intensive work on language development through the content areas. Topical vocabulary is stressed during these lessons. Other Title III classes focus on language development, listening and speaking skills, and use of technology to support those skills. In the spring term, students focused on skills they would need to handle the NYSESLAT examination, including intensive study of vocabulary, reading and listening skills, and ultimately, writing practice. The integrated ENL model allows for the ELA and ENL teachers to confer on the progress of these long-term ELLs, which is another step toward meeting their individual needs. Reinforcement of the habits of proficient readers is paramount, and instruction must be geared toward developing skills such as inferencing, main idea, and cause and effect. Most long term ELLs are indicating a lack of proficiency in these specific literacy skills and teachers are analyzing this data to conduct intervention services in small groups. e. Plan for former ELLsAlthough these students have reached proficiency, we still monitor their progress and make sure that we help them transition by providing them with time and a half on the state assessments and with a glossary in their native language as well. We have found that these modifications have helped our newly proficient students feel confident and transition smoothly. Additionally, for two years, our transitional students receive a translation of terms glossary for English Language Arts, Math, Science, and Social Studies in addition to a regular translation glossary. Students are told that even though they have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT, they are still provided with support such as the extra time on tests and the glossaries to help them transition. We try, wherever the program permits, to retain proficient students in a class with ELLs. In that manner, they receive the additional support from the ENL teacher, as per the CR PART 154. They are afforded the use of the Rosetta Stone program to further develop their vocabulary and spoken skills and they are programmed for MyLexia. Additionally, they will also be given the opportunity to attend the extended day sessions, where they can develop test-taking skills. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs use the same curriculum materials as general education students. We supplement these materials with visuals and use of technology. The My Lexia reading program provides students with books on topics according to reading level. Students can gain background knowledge and access to content in a meaningful way. In addition, students are encouraged to use native language support when needed to understand content. In order to make academic content comprehensible and accelerate English development we use the following strategies: - Providing them with concrete objects and visuals, especially when teaching abstract terms and concepts. -Writing lesson objectives using short, concise language and highlighting key words in objectives -Providing sentence frames to model appropriate language according to language function (compare/contrast, summarizing, 9  inferring, sequencing , etc) and model usage of content vocabulary -Using the workshop model during the mini lesson (teacher model, guided practice, independent practice) -Assess and utilize students' background knowledge/ use native language support when needed -Using oral and written language while teaching content -Explicitly teach thinking skills and learning strategies to develop English language learners as effective, independent learners. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In order to meet the diverse needs of the ELL-SWD students, we strive to provide their instruction in the least restrictive environment. We do so by affording all SWD classes a schedule that has them receiving their ENL instruction through integrated ENL classes whose lessons are meticulously planned by BOTH the ENL teacher and their classroom teacher. The two teachers take an active role in these lessons, and each teacher handles his/her own groups for conferencing and work time. In the event that additional services are mandated for specific students, they are pulled out to receive stand alone instruction by a licensed ENL teacher. This allows the teacher to provide targeted instruction that takes into consideration each student's mandated modifications and allows for small group and differentiation of instruction. Flexible programming involves using all special education services to meet each student’s needs in the least restrictive environment. The IEP team reviews IEPs to determine the appropriate placements for ELLs-SWDs based on strengths and needs of individual students. Our IEP team determined that one of our ELLs-SWDs will be placed in a self-contained class for cotent subjects and attend the ICT class during ELA. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention program for ELLs include providing extra periods in literacy using the "Raz Kids" and "My Lexia" program, a web-based, individualized program that is scientifically proven to accelerate reading comprehension, vocabulary, writing proficiency, and performance on high stakes tests. It is matched to each student's individual Lexile level, and utilizes technology to help each student progress in reading and writing proficiency. The specific subgroups of ELLs targeted in these interventions are determined by using formative assessments, such as Fountas and Pinell, and teacher-created formative and summative assessments, as well as the NYS ELA and Math exam scores. The ELLs who are performing below grade level in core content areas are pinpointed to receive interventions. In addition to MyLexia targeted intervention in ELA and other content areas, scaffolds, and targeted conferences are used as interventions to address student's specific needs. ELA and Math are programmed in double blocks as an intervention service to allow for a deep study of the subject. Teachers are provided easily-obtained data through the computer. In addition, ELLs performing below grade level are targeted for an AIS Math or ELA program. In the science and social studies departments, there is a literacy component in our instruction that bridges all content area subjects. We want our ELLs to use the native language to support their learning. Therefore, we allow them to carry electronic translators and we have both picture and regular dictionaries in addition. We have word-to-word dictionaries as well, and we place those in our ELL content area classrooms. When students come in from other countries, we pair them within their classes with students in the same language group so that they can assimilate to the school setting. We also maintain a list of current staff which includes any language other than English that they can speak. When we require translation services, either for administrative purposes, or for the students, we can call upon them utilizing this list. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on students' performance during the 2017 NYESLAT, it is apparent that our standalone ENL program needs more explicit writing instruction. Using the ELL Data Analysis tool, we noticed that more students score low in the writing modality of the test than any other area. 4 students (10% of our ELL population) scored low in writing, whereas 0 students scored low in speaking, and only 1 student scored low in both reading and listening modalities. To that end, we have decided to develop a new unit of instruction to add to our ENL curriculum for the upcoming year, focusing on the structure of narrative writing. Based on analysis of student work during our inquiry session, we have noticed that students need additional support with the structure of the English language and vocabulary development in their writing. To us assist with this effort, we have purchased BrainPop ESL, which we will begin to integrate into our standalone lessons for the upcoming school 0  year. Furthermore, we will implement improvements to the structure of our Integrated ENL program in the upcoming school year, by restructuring co-planning and co-teaching among classroom/subject teachers and teachers of ELLs, to allow for enhanced collaboration. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs or services for ELLs will be discontinued this year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We have Greater Ridgewood Youth Council (GRYC), which is an after-school recreational program. Flyers are sent out to parents in multiple home languages to afford all ELLs to opportunity to participate in the program. We also offered our Grade 8 ELLs the opportunity to participate in the specialized high school preparatory course being offered here. Permission slips are sent out to parents in September. The classes are meeting for 8, one hour sessions per week during the month of October. Opportunity to participate in all recreational and academic programs is offered to ALL students in the school, including our ELLs. Many of our ELLs have participated in the Title III After School Program for ELLs. This program targets specific groups of ELLs for additional language and academic support. In analyzing Fountas and Pinnell data for the 2016-2017 school year, we noticed that ELLs in 3rd grade have made very little progress in terms of their decoding and comprehension skills. Most of these students are still performing below grade level on classroom assessments and are reading several grade levels below their respective grades. However in first grade, we had several new students and according to the NYSITELL we have more students in the entering and emerging levels than in any other grade. In third grade we had two students who did not show progress the previous year. ELLs are being exposed to complex texts with support during the school day. However, we feel that in order to achieve grade-level reading skills, they need additional practice with fluency, vocabulary and comprehension. Therefore, we will need to increase their opportunities to work with texts at their independent reading levels, in order to build fluency, stamina and overall reading level. We will be target students in grades 1-4 and allocate Title III funds to purchase materials and create programs aimed at boosting students' decoding, fluency and comprehension skills, and developing their vocabulary. We target the foundational literacy needs of students in each of these groups by using Phonics and word study workbooks to target decoding and vocabulary at students' individual reading levels. In addition, we use Rosetta Stone to develop students' vocabulary, grammar and reading comprehension skills. Students use the online leveled reading program Raz Kids to improve their reading comprehension and fluency. Also, we use A-Z Reading leveled texts for reading comprehension instruction. Students will be grouped by grade level. This allows us to focus on deficiencies within each grade. Subgroups and grade levels served: Grades 1 and 2 (entering through expanding) and Grades 3 and 4 (transitioning and expanding). A binder maintains student attendance and program notifications ( permission slips, letters sent home etc). This binder will be stored in the Assistant Principals office. Other recreational programs involve our physical education department. We have a program called "CHAMPS".This program invites all students to participate. It is a recreational multi-sport program. All students are invited to join the student council as well, which meets once a month with the principal. This council plans social activities and discusses its ideas for student involvement in the school community. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We utilize SMARTBOARDS, ELMOs, and laptop computers in the course of our instruction to create visual aid. These support delivery of lessons, as well as development of special projects. We have leveled libraries as well as native language books, and we have distributed a dictionary to every ELL in the building. Students are also supported through use of word-to-word dictionaries in the classroom and on standardized examinations. We use "Achieve 3000" with our ELLs. For the newcomer subgroup of our ELL population, the computer software program Rosetta Stone is utilized to help develop students' basic social English skills, in all 4 language modalities. All ELL students also have access to MyOn, an online interactive reading program that allows students to read books at their independent levels, and includes an audio component to allow students to listen to books being read by a native English 1  speaker. This program is used during independent reading time at school, and is also available to students at home to provide extra support for their reading development. Content area instructional materials that are used for all ELLs include glossaries (with pictures) of content-specific vocabulary and concepts; modified or, when available, native language content-area texts; and dictionaries and/or electronic translators in students' home languages. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Entering and emerging students are paired with a peer in their class who shares their native language to provide content clarification in their home language. We utilize students who have proficiency in their native language, as well as competence in English. As previously mentioned, we allow the use of tablets installed with translation applications in the classroom to support content area comprehension. Word-to-word dictionaries are available in most of the native languages represented and we have also purchased English dictionaries for students to use alongside the translation dictionaries. Native language libraries are available in the classrooms, as well as in the school library. The school librarian supplies the library with books in several languages represented among our student body. ELLs whose IEPs specify a bilingual para will receive that service as well. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. When new ELLs are registered at our school, their previous academic history in their home country or in the US is considered before placing students. Because age-grade correspondence sometimes differs in other countries, students are placed in the corresponding grade where they left off, to continue their education uninterrupted. This way instruction will be appropriate for each student, as all ELLs receive the same grade-level instruction as all other students, in both integrated and standalone ENL. All students receive access to the same curriculum. All text in all content areas are at students grade level. Access and support to the texts and other materials are scaffolded by chunking, filtering vocabulary and guided questioning which are used to increase comprehension. The supports utilized by ELL service providers are designed to scaffold the school-wide curriculum, which addresses skills that are developmentally in line with students' age and grade level, according to the Common Core Learning Standards adopted by New York State. It also utilizes texts that are at an age-appropriate interest level for the majority of students in that grade. When alternate texts are used to support ELLs who are reading far below grade level, as well as ELLs with disabilities, the texts are specifically chosen to ensure that the content and topics are age-appropriate, while still being accessible to these students. For this reason, grade-level texts are often adapted for lower reading levels if no age-appropriate texts are available at these levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled students and their parents are provided with a tour of the school. During the tour, they are explained the breakdown of the school policies as well as are shown important places such as the cafeteria and the auditorium. The bell system, dismissal and arrival policies, and lunchroom procedures are explained to them. They are then introduced to other students or school staff who speak their native language, in order to facilitate a smoother transition to our school community. Throughout the year, ENL teachers communicate with newly enrolled ELLs and their families to monitor their progress and transition to our school community. Our parent coordinator and ENL teachers organize workshops and other activities where families of new ELLs can meet with other families in our school and build connections. If a new student is struggling socially, they will meet with the guidance counselor to explore techniques for making friends and provide an opportunity to discuss any issues they are having with transitioning into a new school environment. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELL students in grades 7 and 8 are given the opportunity to take Spanish as a foreign language. 2  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers of ELLs will have ongoing training in differentiation for ELLs. In addition to attending professional development sessions provided by school personnel, teachers will also receive training from outside consultants (i.e. Generation Ready; ASCD) instructors in the use of data to create appropriate scaffolds for learners. We are conducting professional development sessions to ensure that current, research-based vocabulary strategies are utilized for our students. Teachers who share ELL classes will work in teams to plan collaboratively. All content area ELL teachers are trained through planning periods with assistant principals and lead teachers who have been trained in differentiated instruction techniques; creating and using language objectives which are aligned to unit tasks and skills in ELA curriculum; scaffolding for complex texts and tasks; and increasing student engagement through speaking and listeningELL-related professional learning sessions will be provided during the allotted professional development time on the last Monday of every month (or the second-to-last Monday if school is not in session on the last Monday). All teachers of ELLs will attend the following ELL-related PDs:DATE TOPICMonday, September 25: Introducing the New Language ProgressionsMonday, October 30th: Creating and Using Language ObjectivesMonday, November 27th: Scaffolding Using the New Language ProgressionsMonday, December 18th: Workshop: Analyzing units of study to align with New Language ProgressionsMonday, January 29th: Study session 1: Intro to Collaboration and Co-teaching for ELLsMonday, February 26th: Study session 2: Best practices for collaboration and co-teaching for ELLsMonday, March 26th: ELLs/SWD: similarities, differences and intersectionalityMonday, April 23rd: Close Reading with ELLsMonday, May 21st: Academic language development with ELLsAdditionally, teachers of ELLs will be sent to outside learning opportunities given by the Queens North Field Support Center, the UFT, R-BERN and other organizations that offer professional development to support ELL teachers throughout the year.All non-teacher ELL personnel, who do not attend the Monday PD sessions (including psychologists, guidance counselors, speech/occupational/physical therapists, secretaries, and parent coordinators), will receive ELL-related professional development at other times throughout the school year, both in-house and by attending outside learning opportunities. Topics for these sessions will include: protocol for intake of ELLs, including registration and administration of the HLIS, parent outreach and contact for LEP parents, data collection and analysis for ELLs, protocol for determination of SIFE status, protocol for identification of ELLs with disabilities (LPT). 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 for all teachers by providing ELL-related PDs once per month, during the regularly scheduled professional development time on Monday afternoons. These sessions will focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Topics for these PDs will be: Introducing the New Language Progressions, Creating and Using Language Objectives, Scaffolding Using the New Language Progressions, Workshop: Analyzing units of study to align with the New Language Progressions, Study session 1: Intro to Collaboration and Co-Teaching for ELLs, Study Session 2: Best practices for collaboration and coteaching for ELLs, ELLs/SWD: similarities, differences and intersectionality, Close Reading for ELLs, Academic Language Development for ELLs.Our school meets the professional development requirement as per CR Part 152.2 for ENL certified 3  teachers by sending these teachers to outside ELL-related PDs (in addition to the in-house Monday professional development). These professional learning opportunities are by the Queens North Field Support Center, the UFT, R-BERN and other organizations, and they will focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners.Attendance is documented through a sign-in sheet and records are maintained with administration. Teachers are encouraged to store agendas as proof of attendance. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to Parent Teacher Conferences, initial parent orientations, we will be meeting with parents of ELLs quarterly to discuss the goals of the program, their child's language development progress, English language proficiency assessments, and language development needs in all content areas. All staff necessary to inform parents of their child's progress will be in attendance. A qualified interpreter or/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands will be provided. We will ask for available staff or use the Translation unit (if necessary). Meetings are scheduled during our designated Parent Engagement time. During scheduled meetings with parents we review student progress, discuss goals and explain strategies we use to help their child. We also provide suggestions and resources parents can use at home. For example, we show parents how to use Googe Translate to look up words while doing homework. In addtion, we give supply parents with information to use Dial-a-Teacher as a way to help their child complete homework. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs are provided with subject-appropriate workshops on a monthly basis, during Tuesday Parent Engagement time. Some of these include: a) Orientation and program selection (September) b) Expectations and tips for helping your child at home (October) c) Looking ahead to high school: options, what to expect and admissions (for middle school parents) (November) d) DOE and community resources for ELL parents (December) c) What is required of your child on standardized examinations? (January) d) Understanding the NYSESLAT examination (Feburary) e) English language workshops for adults (which parents can attend with their children) (March, April, May, June)These subject-appropriate workshops are facilitated by the ELL teacher, along with varied personnel depending upon the topic. We have utilized subject teachers, ENL teachers, and assistant principals to assist us with these activities. We also provide translation services through school personnel, and each meeting is translated into the varying home languages of the parents present. Wherever necessary, we will utilize the translation services provided by the Department of Education. All parents are invited to workshops continuously throughout the school year. These are facilitated by assistant principals, our parent coordinator, and teachers as required. Simultaneous translation services are provided by bilingual staff as necessary for parents who speak other languages. Those deal with: a) guiding good choices--a 5-session workshop on drug prevention and strengthening parental relationships with children. b) how to read the report card c) health issues d) promotion standards e) high school application process f) high school articulation (fairs) g) meet the teachers school and curricula orientation night h) nutrition i) bullying Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 4  5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Camillo Turriciano, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Camillo V. Turriciano Title Principal Eva Petrolekas Assistant Principal Melissa Phillips Parent Coordinator Erin Kilbride ENL/Bilingual Teacher Dawn Camus Parent Sarah Komins Teacher/Subject Area Patricia Karl Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Irene Papatsos School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Elizabeth Caba Other IEP Teacher Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/15/17 09/15/17 09/15/17 09/15/17 09/15/17 09/15/17 09/15/17 09/15/17 09/15/17 7 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: PS/IS 128 Superintendent: Madelene Chan DBN: 24Q128 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (Primary*) Eva Petrolekas Assistant Principcal Erin Sarah - Kilbride Komins - ESL teacher ESL Teacher - conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No No No No - yes yes yes - * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We review the HLIS forms on an ongoing basis and consult with our parent coordinator. We utilize an ATS report, RHLA, which gives us the variety of languages spoken in the homes of our students. In addition, parent contact cards, which are filled out during the first week of school, have a “language spoken at home” information section. When parents register their children, they are asked to write down the language in which they want communication sent home. They have the right to ask that we communicate in their native language. 8  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ALBANIAN ARABIC CHINESE ANY ITALIAN ENGLISH POLISH PORTUGUESE ROMANIAN RUSSIAN SENUFO SERBIAN SPANISH TURKISH URDU UKRAINIAN 7 12 11 2 1033 45 13 2 1 1 1 28 1 1 1 0.6 1.04 0.95 0.17 89.13 3.88 1.12 0.17 0.09 0.09 0.09 2.42 0.09 0.09 0.09 10 14 11 2 1020 47 13 2 3 1 2 31 1 1 1 0.86 1.21 0.95 0.17 88.01 4.06 1.12 0.17 0.26 0.09 0.17 2.67 0.09 0.09 0.09 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Annual handbooks and Discipline codes Once per year, in September Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. These documents are translated into all of the above languages using translation software, and edited/revised to ensure they are comprehensible by staff members (or friends/family members of staff members) who speak those 9  Parent-teacher conference announcements Distributed two weeks prior to each conference (in September, November, March and May); After-school program announcements Distributed approximately one month prior to the start of the program, in October MOSL and NY State testing dates and announcements Distributed approximately two weeks prior to the tests, in September, March, and May Notices announcing the meeting giving a general overview of the curriculum Distributed 10 days prior to the meeting (in September) Notices announcing monthly Parent Association meetings Distributed 1 week prior to each meeting, every month languages. This is done during the summer in order to ensure that these documents are ready for dissemination in September. These documents are translated into all of the above languages using translation software, and edited/revised to ensure they are comprehensible by staff members (or friends/family members of staff members) who speak those languages. This is done one month prior to conferences, in order to ensure timely dissemination. These documents are translated into all of the above languages using translation software, and edited/revised to ensure they are comprehensible by staff members (or friends/family members of staff members) who speak those languages. This is done during the first two weeks of school in order to ensure timely dissemination. These documents are translated into all of the above languages using translation software, and edited/revised to ensure they are comprehensible by staff members (or friends/family members of staff members) who speak those languages. This is done approximately one month prior to tests to ensure timely dissemination. These documents are translated into all of the above languages using translation software, and edited/revised to ensure they are comprehensible by staff members (or friends/family members of staff members) who speak those languages. This is done during the summer in order to ensure that these documents are ready for dissemination in September. These documents are translated into all of the above languages using translation software, and edited/revised to ensure they are comprehensible by staff members (or friends/family members of staff 0  Agendas/reflection forms for monthly parent meetings Distributed at the meetings, 1 per month, every month All notices from school leadership, which are ongoing throughout the school year. Distributed as necessary throughout the year members) who speak those languages. This is approximately two weeks prior to each meeting, to ensure timely dissemination. These documents are translated into all of the above languages using translation software, and edited/revised to ensure they are comprehensible by staff members (or friends/family members of staff members) who speak those languages. This is done the week prior to each meeting to ensure timely dissemination. These documents are translated into all of the above languages using translation software, and edited/revised to ensure they are comprehensible by staff members (or friends/family members of staff members) who speak those languages. This is done on an as-needed basis, ensuring that the notices are disseminated at the same time as the English versions. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Initial intake meetings and interviews (conducted during enrollment) Kindergarten registration occurs in March or April of the year prior. Other enrollment takes place either in September, or throughout the year as new students register. Meet the Teacher night , Parent-Teacher Conferences These meetings take place 4 times per year: during the months of September, December, March and May interpretation service(s)? For these intake meetings, face to face oral interpretation services are provided by staff members who speak the following languages: Spanish, Polish, Arabic, Chinese, and Italian. For any other language, oral interpretation is provided over the phone via the Translation and Interpretation Unit. The meeting is held via speakerphone, so that all parties can hear the interpretation. For these meetings, face to face oral interpretation services are provided by staff members who speak the following languages: Spanish, Polish, Arabic, Chinese, and Italian. For any other language, oral interpretation is provided over the phone via the 1  IEP meetings These meetings occur periodically throughout the year (each student has one meeting per year) for parents of students with disabilities. Yearly ELL progress parent meetings Once per year, determined by the availability of the parent and ENL teachers Informal meetings with parents Tuesday afternoons, during Parent Engagement time, and at various other times throughout the year based on the availability of parents and teachers Translation and Interpretation Unit. The meeting is held via speakerphone, so that all parties can hear the interpretation. For these meetings, face to face oral interpretation services are provided by staff members who speak the following languages: Spanish, Polish, Arabic, Chinese, and Italian. For any other language, oral interpretation is provided over the phone via the Translation and Interpretation Unit. The meeting is held via speakerphone, so that all parties can hear the interpretation. For these meetings, face to face oral interpretation services are provided by staff members who speak the following languages: Spanish, Polish, Arabic, Chinese, and Italian. For any other language, oral interpretation is provided over the phone via the Translation and Interpretation Unit. The meeting is held via speakerphone, so that all parties can hear the interpretation. For these meetings, face to face oral interpretation services are provided by staff members who speak the following languages: Spanish, Polish, Arabic, Chinese, and Italian. For any other language, oral interpretation is provided over the phone via the Translation and Interpretation Unit. The meeting is held via speakerphone, so that all parties can hear the interpretation. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school currently utilizes school messenger to communicate with families. Within school messenger there is an option to select the family's preferred language. In the event of an emergency, the family would receive an automated phone call or text message in their preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure2  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. On the first staff development day of the school year, the Language Access Coordinator will give a brief workshop to the entire staff on the Chancellor's Regulation A-663, to ensure all staff is aware of parents' rights regarding translation and interpretation, as well as resources available to all staff regarding translation and interpretation. They will be provided with a copy of the Language Access Support brochure, provided on the DOE website, which provides reminders of translation and interpretation resources available to all DOE staff. They will also view the video entitled "Over the Phone Instructional Video," which instructs staff on how to use the over the phone interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) According the Chancellors Regulations there are 30 days to determine the language needs of parents and a responsibility to maintain a record of this information. At the moment of intake, we determine language needs of parents on the HLIS and on the Preferred Communication form provided by the NYCDOE. This information is compiled and added to the existing document created by the ESL teacher. We refer to this document when determining the oral language needs when providing the Parent Orientation, holding parent meetings such as IEP or PTC. In addition we use this information when preparing to send notifications home to parents as well: IEP meeting, PTC meetings, as well as entitlement letters. We have staff members who can provide translations (oral and written) when needed. However, if a time occurs when staff is not available, we rely on the Translation Unit, via the phone to provide important information to parents. We also translate important documents and signs for parents. For example, our school provides parents with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities, in various languages, which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. In addition, our Parent Coordinator's office displays a sign indicating the availability of interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school gathers feedback from parents on the quality and availability of translation and interpretation services in two ways. 1. At the end of each meeting held with parents, parents are asked to fill out a form reflecting on the meeting, and asking for feedback about what could be improved regarding our communication with parents. On this form, parents can indicated how the felt about the translation or interpretation services that were provided. 2. In February of each year, parents are provided with the offical NYC School Survey, on which they are asked about the quality of the communication our school provides, including translation and interpretation services. Both of these 3  sources of feedback provide valuable data for us to use in considering improvements to the translation and interpretation services we provide to parents. 4 
