 29Q136 School Name: P.S. 136 ROY WILKINS Principal: TANYA S.T. WALKER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Roy Wilkins – Public School 136 0331 School Number (DBN): 29Q136 Pre Kindergarten, Kindergarten, Grade 1, Grade 2, Grade 3, Grade 4, Grade 5 201-15 115 th Avenue St. Albans, New York 11412 718-465-2286 Phone Number: 718-464-0040 Fax: Dr. Tanya S. T. Walker Twalker@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Email Address: Dr. Tanya S. T. Walker Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ms. ElechiOsueke Ms. Julie London Dr. Tanya Walker Mr. Fritz Thomas N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 29 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ms. Beverly Mitchell Superintendent: 90-11 191st Street Hollis, NY 11423 Bmitche2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-217-7740 Phone Number: 718-217-7739 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   QueensSouth FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Ms. Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 82-01 RockawayBlvd Queens, NY 11416 Mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-206-6743 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. T. Walker E. Osueke J. London M. Holcombe F. Thomas K. Davidson L.Powell Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher   K. Purvis C. Wilson E. Felix F. McMullen C. Watson Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? It is the mission of the Roy Wilkins School — PS 136Q school community, to collaborate with staff, students, and parents to develop and maintain a nurturing, student-centered learning environment. By consistently utilizing data and problem based learning , we work towards providing optimal learning experiences that meet the needs of all students and empowers them to be leaders who strive for success. PS 136Q – The Roy Wilkins School   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Named after the prominent civil rights leader, The Roy Wilkins School PS 136Q was built in 1927. Our fine school is quietly nestled within the heart of the St. Albans, Queens community-- home of many famous Jazz musicians including Billie Holiday, Count Basie, Ella Fitzgerald, Lena Horne, Lester Young and James Brown. At PS 136Q, we are a “Community of Believers” who recognize and celebrate the diversity within our population. The staff focuses on individual learning by fulfilling each students’ academic, physical and social needs. The Roy Wilkins School expects that all students will achieve their full potential. Some of the academic and social supports for staff, students and families within our school community are: ● Common preps each day for teachers on each grade to engage in grade wide planning ● Professional Learning Team Meetings monthly with School Administration to communicate goals, set standards of expectations, share best practices and review data and engage in inquiry team work ● Pupil Personnel Committee Meetings (every other) to ensure that all students are receiving proper support, mandated or at risk. ● Attendance Team which meets weekly to monitor frequently absent and late students and to provide support to those families. The team also celebrates the progress of students and families. ● Targeted curriculum enrichment and supports, weekly for each grade where students have an opportunity to practice skills in ELA, Mathematics, Social Studies and Science. ● A full time Guidance Counselor, IEP Coordinator, F Status Guidance Counselor, part time Social Worker and School Psychologist to meet emotional needs in individual and group settings. ● Parent Coordinator who works with parents and students, as needed, on understanding the connection between educational attainment and personal achievement. ● School Day Clubs provide students with alternate opportunities to express themselves and their talents. Clubs include: Lunch Clubs, Art, Computer, Chess, Dance, Sports, Basketball Team (varsity/junior varsity) , Chorus, Nutrition, Future Teachers, Student Council (membership from each grade - 5) and a Drum line, ● Specialized clubs for students who may have adjustment and social/emotional concerns: Twins Club, Eyeglasses Club, Boys Club, Only Child Club, Nutrition Club and Fitness Club ● Teacher Team / Data Analysis Meetings once a week devoted to looking at student work in relationship to teacher practices and making adjustments to ensure student success. On a daily basis, our students engage in problem based learning through small group data driven instruction in all core subjects. In addition, we have the following staff members who provide services to our students on a daily/weekly basis ● 1 Art teacher, Dance Teacher, 2 Physical Education Teachers ● 1 STEM Teacher, ELA/ Library and Technology Lab 0  ● 2 ENL Teachers and 1 full time and 1 part time Speech Therapist, 1 Occupational Therapist, Physical Therapist ● 4 Self Contained Classes ● 5 Integrated Team Teaching Classes Community Partners Include: * Make Music Count - Piano Math Program * Carmichael's Jazz Ensemble * Marching Band under the direction of NuVision ● NYU - ParentCorps Brain Power  Roy Wilkins Park - Swimming ● Mr. Chris’ Musical Experience ● Queens Public Library ● Queens Park Rangers Association ● NY Courts and District Attorney ● NY Liberty and NY Nets * Jason Spenser Edwards, Author * Senator Comrie and Councilman I'Deneek Miller's office Special Events Include: ● Family Literacy Pajama Night , Family Math Night, Science / Technology Fair, Dance Festival, Winter & Spring Concerts, Social Studies Fair ● Back to School Night and Field Day ● Monthly Community Read/ Character Development Books ● Father’s Fourth Friday Monthly Workshops - Monthly ● Wonderful Wednesday Moms Workshops - Monthly ● Monthly Special Assembly Programs including Character Development, Respect, Black History and Martin Luther King and Recycling ● Attendance Celebration and other Student/ Staff/ Parent Recognition Celebrations 1  ● Workshops for Parents: Various Topics including all curriculum areas and grading policies ● Parents with the Principal bi -monthly meetings ● Health and Fitness awareness - Mighty Milers ● Honor Awards - Student of the Month Assemblies ● Monthly PTA meetings which focus on key issues that impact our school population ● Title 1 meetings which focus on keeping parents aware of use of goals for Title 1 spending Perhaps our greatest achievement, however, is how beautiful our school is maintained via bulletin boards and cleanliness and the warmth that radiates from our children /classrooms as you travel throughout our hallways. The students exude a confidence that we work daily to build. They know unequivocally that we believe in them. They take comfort in the fact that they are loved. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. ENL population is growing with students who speak Arabic and Spanish. Although they are learning English rapidly, initially they are only able to read and understand Arabic and Spanish respectively. Their specific need is to learn the English language and the Culture. We have 2 ENL teachers who will host Bi-Monthly parent workshops (bringing in community resources). We have learned that families of our students are also in need of English Language and community support. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. One major area of focus for PS 136Q for the 2018-2019 school year, from the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, will be creating a community of trust. A seminal study on reform, found that enabling positive social relationships between the adults was the key to successful school improvement and that trust was at the heart of those relationships. Trust means safety to share what is and is not working, collectively make decisions, take risks and sometimes fail, but keep learning. By building trust in a school community, the beneficiaries will be the students. Teachers will collaborate more, become more invigorated by their work which will lead to more engaging and thought provoking project based lessons for students. Teacher/ staff will be more sensitive to their students' relational issues. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q136 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 618 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 69 70 23 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 23 9 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 79.0% % Attendance Rate 74.6% % Reduced Lunch 6.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 10.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.61 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 38.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 77% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 41 40 23 91.1% 3.6% 14.2% 85.1% 1.6% 1.5% 2 5% 5.3 26.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. (1) In terms of strengths for rigorous instruction, on our Quality Review feedback from 2017-18, assets include Quality Indicator 1.1 --"curriculum maps are designed through collaboration between vertical and horizontal teams", "tasks across content areas embed opportunities for students to think accurately", and a "school wide instructional focus on student engagement that illustrate tasks designed for enrichment and instruction and acceleration for students with diverse needs". Similarly, for Quality indicator 3.4, findings indicate the school has a culture of learning that consistently communicates high expectations for staff and students. (2) As a school leadership team, based on the trends and data collected , one of the main priority needs that we are addressing is Mathematics instruction and overall performance. Our school wide focus will continue to be targeted, data driven small group instruction. The rational for this is according to the current NYC Performance Dashboard, as well as data from the NYS Mathematics Exam, we need to improve our Mathematics performance levels for all students, especially students with English as a New Language ( ENL’s), students with disabilities (SWD’s) and other subgroups. We will continue to analyze our progress in this area, using I-ready information, MOSL data, Go Math unit exams and data from teacher created exams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of students in K -5 will demonstrate an increase of 1 performance level in at least 5 out of 5 rubric criteria, as measured by the Spring 2019 NYC math MOSL performance assessment and rubric. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).    (BOY) Beginning of Year performance assessment (MOSL), will be administered to measure evidence of students' learning, gaps and monitor progress. I-Ready diagnostic Math Exams are administered All Students September 2018 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders, Testing Coordinator Classroom Teachers  Teacher Leaders will participate in Borough Field Support Math Professional Development to facilitate turnkey sessions to classroom teachers during on site professional development. School Based Professional Development will be provided on targeted, data driven, small group instruction School Based Professional Development will be provided for Mathematical Practices, curriculum, planning, problem solving and other   September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders, Classroom Teachers  Grade Math Experts-Teacher Leaders  Al Rich mathematical tasks promoting problem solving and open ended questions requiring critical think skills will be incorporated into lessons and unit plans. All Students/ Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Math Teachers on each grade will engage in collaborative planning sessions where an emphasis will be placed on the infusion). Lead Math Teachers Grades K - 5 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders, Classroom Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders, Classroom Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. September 2018- June 2019 parents will receive monthly math curriculum updates from the math expert on each grade via the website and on weekly homework sheets, which requires their signature upon completion . This will keep families informed of math skills and strategies being taught and extra resources to support their learning. Parent workshops will also be hosted by our Parent Coordinator, Ms. Francis and Math experts on each grade, to assist them 5  in understanding the math curriculum and helping their children to succeed. Additionally, parent work family engagement Tuesdays will encourage parents to spend time in our library with teachers assisting and giving homework tips for parents and students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common preps Mathematics Professional Development (inside and outside the school) Weekly Teacher Team meetings RTI tracking sheets Administrative Support through Advance and feedback Math Teacher Leader Vertical Team Meetings Classroom inter-visitation Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 80% of students in K -5 will demonstrate an increase of 1 performance level in at least 3 out of 5 rubric criteria, as measured by a school MOSL-like performance assessment and rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) NYC Performance Assessment in Math-Mid year assessment January-February 2019 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The findings from learning environment 2017-2018 School Survey indicates that 85% of the respondents felt positively to the questions about Supportive Environment. The city average is 83% and the district average is 81% 95% of teacher say that students are safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker room and cafeteria (city average is 95%, 83% of teachers say that adults at the school teach students how to advocate for themselves (city average is 86%) and 95% of the teachers say that their students feel it is important to come to school every day (city average is 89%). OORS report information continues to maintain low instances of high level infractions in relation to the citywide data. Similarly , ATS attendance data indicates that our attendance continues to remain around 90% each year. As a result there is a need to continue empowering teacher and students by using a school wide system to promote self monitoring and self correction. These strategies will assist in maintaining supportive school environment. According to our Quality Review for 2017-18, evidence indicates that in the area of 1.4 maintaining a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes to support the academic and personal growth of students and adults, our rating was proficient. In efforts to increase the multiple entry points and feelings of academic success in each classroom, we would like to continue to focus on this area to become well developed and further support our school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of all classroom teachers will use strategies for Project Based Learning, as compiled by our 2017-18 PBL teacher team, to develop supportive environments through multiple entry points, active engagement and excitement for learning. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Training on Problem Based Learning will be provided to all staff (teachers, clusters, paras and service providers) at the onset of the school year. Teacher Team will be established to create and monitor the ongoing implementation of PBL in content areas Science / Social Studies. This team will meet at least 3 Mondays through the school year. All teaching staff and students in Grades K-5 Students and Families September 2018 Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Classroom Teachers September 2018- June 20189 Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers Group Norms will be created, displayed and frequently referred to during lessons throughout the school day as a means to promote self assessment, team work and advocacy. Family will be provided with a workshop on the Group Norms. School wide incentives and rewards for positive behavior (parties, citizenship assemblies, positive phone calls home, etc. and Parent Education through workshops , newsletters, school website and special assemblies. Additionally, students will have weekly "speak outs' at our Character Day Wednesday, where they will share "what's on your mind." Students and Families September 2018- June 2019 Students and Families September 2018- June 2019 Teacher Team Members Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Classroom Teachers Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Classroom Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive weekly information from classroom teachers as needed. Monthly classes and students will be celebrated in the school newsletter. Guidance Counselor and Classroom teachers will be responsible. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will participate in professional development workshop for Project Based Learning at the beginning of September 2018 8  Ongoing professional development will be provided throughout the school year on Project Based Learning. Common preps and planning periods are scheduled to plan lessons and activities for for Science/Social Studies lessons Scheduling of parent meetings and workshops for parents on PBL Scheduling of assemblies for students to celebrate school wide success Teachers schedule time in their day for classroom and individual celebrations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school administration and teacher team members will walk through classrooms to observe (informally) student active engagement. This includes, student group /project based work and student voice and advocacy. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher team minutes and agenda and signature sheets from participation in professional development will be used to measure that the PBL is being implemented and self assessments and walk through documents will be used to assess the progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The findings from recent school quality report 2017-2018 indicates that 92% responded positively to the questions about collaborative teachers which is well above the city at 87% and the district at 84%. More specifically, 95% of teachers ay that teacher at this school work together to design instructional programs. 95% of teachers say that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school and 100% of teachers say that teachers feel responsible that all student learn. Although substantial progress has been made in this area, there continued need for this to be an area of focus. Greater collaborations lead to greater student achievement. 2. Priority needs that will be addressed in the goal and action plan include:  Ensuring engaging, rigorous and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible learning for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards.  Developing teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging and meets the needs of the learners so that all students produce meaningful work products.  Aligning assessments to curricula, using on-going assessments and grading practices, and analyzing information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, as a result of all collaborative teacher teams' planning unit and lesson plans to include instructional techniques that promote high levels of student engagement and inquiry and/or project based learning, at least 90% of teachers will receive end of year advance MOTP ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in components 1e and 3c as measured by end of year Advance MOTP ratings. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All classroom Teachers supported by grade leaders and school administration All Teachers - in class and out of class, supported by grade leaders and school administration September 2018 - January 2019 and February - May 2018 and June 2019 September 2018- January 2019 and January 2019 - May 2019 and June 2019 Teachers will collaborate each Monday to share, revise and adapt instructional techniques, unit plans and lessons. All staff members  Develop action plans for next steps to strengthen teacher work and increase student achievement. Increase student engagement via inquiry and /or project based learning  All staff members Attendance at grade meetings which incorporate teacher engagement, teacher learning and teacher support to form a continuous cycle of development.  Teacher Support: Teachers connect and share their practice with administration and experienced mentors for feedback regarding their practice. Teachers get support in implementing new ideas in their classroom and/or refining the skills they have. Peer coaching involves looking specifically at teachers practice and providing feedback on how to get better.  Teacher Engagement: Teachers gain immense value from interacting with administration, colleagues and peers. By sharing challenges, successes, Teachers identify new practices to implement and develop solutions to problems. Teachers set goals and effective action planning.  Teacher Learning: Teachers research and learn what information exists outside their collegial circle. Academic content, innovative teaching strategies, instructional skills targeted at improving achievement of bottom one third, ENL’s and SWD’s, effective classroom management, differentiation, questioning techniques, the effective use of assessments, rubrics and implementation of coherent grading practices.  Additional Collaborative Teams: General Ed., Special Education Teachers and Service Providers meet to reflect on student data. and growth trends. 1  Collaborations with parents will include: Family Literacy NightEarly Childhood interactive literacy activities for parents and children the first Friday of each month and monthly Parent PD sessions regarding how to be the primary teacher for their children and full partners in education. Early Childhood Parents and all Parents Parent Coordinator, School Admin., Guidance Counselor and identified Teachers November 2018, December 2018, First Friday of each month 2018-2019, Each month 2018-2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. September - June 2019 monthly newsletter will inform parents of the collaborative work with Administration and Teachers. Additionally, parents will be invited to class visits monthly and workshops being presented by administration and teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common Prep - Daily Common Lunch - Daily PD Monday's- Weekly Family Engagement Tuesday - Weekly during school hours Grade Meetings Inter-visitation - Per Diem for Sub Teacher to cover classes Model/Demo Lesson -Per Diem for Sub Teacher to cover classes After-school PD for Parents- Per Session Presentations at PTA meetings - Per Session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2  To monitor progress, by February 2018-2019 school administration and a team of identified staff members will review - Teacher Team minutes, review Classroom observations and Feedback sessions, review agendas from monthly Grade Leader meetings and review monthly meetings for parents - review attendance and feedback from sessions. To review a checklist will be used along with a rubric created for teacher team success. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Collaboratively review of student data once a month. This data will come from item analysis of assessments, grade wide assessments and benchmark assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the school survey in 2017-2018 94% of the responded positively responded to questions about effective school leadership. 82% of teachers say that the principal communicates a clear vision for the school, 91% of the teacher say the curriculum, instruction and learning materials are well coordinated across different grade levels and 83% of the teachers feel that they can trust the principal and 58% of the teachers feel that they can trust each others and the school quality report is proficient in the area of school culture 1.4 maintaining a culture of trust. Although trust is difficult to measure, according to the statistics, there is a need to continue to develop confidence and trust amongst staff and in school leadership. Great leaders develop great leaders! Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 School Leaders will lead by example by attending and /or leading monthly professional development and by June 2018, 35% of pedagogues will have distributed leadership roles on established committees. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration, All staff members The book "The Teacher 50 Critical Questions for Inspiring Classroom Excellence" by Baruty Kafele will be used throughout the school year to open dialogue about what great teacher do and how they think. Teacher will be asked to lead discussions. Conduct data analysis, advance cycles of observations, learning walks and weekly meetings. All staff members Monthly September , October, November, December 2018 and Janaury , February, March, April, May and June 2019 September, October, November, Administrators and all staff members Administration and all teachers Implementation of leadership cabinet which will be made up of key personnel responsible for collaboration with administration on relevant and timely matters that impact student achievement at all levels. There will be a member who represents grades, subjects and ENL/SWD's and Subgroups. All staff members September 2018- June 2019 Administration, grade leaders and all teachers Meetings twice a month October , November December 2018 and January, February, March, April, May and June 2019. September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, selected Family Liaisons (one per grade plus ENL/SWD & subgroup) Implementation of family liaison which will be made up of key personnel responsible for collaboration with families (on designated grade) teachers and school administration on relevant and timely matters that impact student achievement and school culture. There will be an identified staff member All Families and Teachers 5 who will be responsible for collaborations with families of ENL, SWD's and subgroups in addition to the grade liaison 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School Administration in conjunction with the Parent Coordinator and Classroom Teachers / Cluster Teachers will create a Monthly School Newsletter will keep families abreast of school goals and what we are doing to work towards meeting them. Parents will be invited to workshops and provided reading materials. September - June 2019. Implementation of family liaison which will be made up of key personnel responsible for collaboration with families (on designated grade) teachers and school administration on relevant and timely matters that impact student achievement and school culture. There will be an identified staff member who will be responsible for collaborations with families of ENL, SWD's and subgroups in addition to the grade liaison. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional development Monday - Weekly Family Engagement Tuesday - Weekly Data Specialist - School wide and on each grade Monthly Learning Walker with Grade Leaders/Curriculum Leaders and Administration Periodic Data Review Weekly Cabinet Meeting Monthly Curriculum and PD Meeting Grade Leader Monthly Meeting Weekly Instructional Team Meetings Per Diem will used to cover classes when Teacher are at PD Per Diem will be used to cover classes when Teachers are conducting PD Per Session will be used to cover the cost of Teachers working after school hours and attending evening meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 6  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of 35% of all teachers assuming distributed leadership roles in the school, at least 35% of teachers will receive at least 2 MOTP ratings of Highly Effective in component 4e, as measured by Advance observation reports between September 2018 and February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Review progress four times throughout the year 2018-2019 and maintain logs. Logs will include attendance forms, minutes from meeting follow a specific protocol. Additionally, surveys for feedback will be distributed and reviewed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In reflecting on our 2017-2018 CEP, as well as previous Learning Environment Surveys and feedback from our Quality Review, increased and improved communication with parents is an area where we can continue to grow in the 2017-2018 school year. We strive to increase participation and engagement from parents throughout our school, and especially in our lower grades, Pre-K through 2. As a School Leadership Team, based on the trends and data examined, (including MOSL, Fountas and Pinnell benchmark reading levels, Go-Math unit assessments, 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey and feedback from the Quality Review), strengthening Family and community ties, especially in the lower grades, will have a positive impact on overall school achievement. Through increased parent workshops, modeling strategies for academic and social-emotional growth for students, and providing information about community resources for families we will strengthen the foundation of our school and convey high expectations about instruction and College and Career readiness for all students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will strengthen parent and community partnerships as measured by a 10% increase in participation in family workshops, outreach activities and parents who agree and strongly agree with the School Culture section of the NYC School Survey. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ParentCorp Early Childhood Workshops for families of students in Pre-Kindergarten, and adaptations of workshops for Parents in Grades Pre K - Kdgn. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents of students in Pre-K and Kdgn January 2019, February, March, April 2019 Teacher Leaders, Teachers of Grades Pre-K-Kdgn, Teachers and Parent Coordinator will attend PD hosted by ParentCorps. Creation of At-A-Glance Monthly Parent Workshop and Activity Course Planner. The guide will outline and describe parent workshops and opportunities to participate in school activities in months in advance so that parents will have increased notice of important dates. Parents of students in Pre-K -5 New School Bulletin Board will provide update information to families along with CNXT and Sonar Cloud which will make robocalls and send text messages to inform and remind parents about events / meetings at the school. Parents of Students in Grades Pre-K-5 Family Community Fun Fair will be held to give parents an opportunity to network with local businesses and community resources Parent Coordinator Room and Family Resource Center will be expanded to include additional technology, literature and resources to assist families with children in our subgroups (SWD’s, ELL’s, etc) and those with a variety of interests. Parent Coordinator will attend monthly PD sessions related to items listed above. Parents of students in Grades Pre-K-5, Parents of students in our subgroups Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator Teachers Leaders Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal Teacher Leaders, Principal, Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal, Principal, Parent Coordinator, Teacher Leaders, Assistant Principal, Family Liaison November 2018, December 2018 and January, March April, May and June 2019 September 2018 October, November, December 2018, January, February, March, April, May and June 2019 January 2019, February, March and April 2019 9  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parent Corp, Sandford Harmony, Brain Power, CNXT parent communication tool. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds will be allocated for ParentCorp program for students, siblings, parents, teachers and staff. All program costs, materials, refreshments, etc is included. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By December 2018 on average, all parents of students in Grades Pre-K-5 will have attended at least one Parent workshop or Family engagement activity. Attendance forms will be compared to the rubric for family engagement to determine if we are on target of meeting our goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Coordinator Activity Log Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school.  Classroom  Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.)  Assessment Data I-Ready   Teacher observations  Performance Tasks Mathematics Science   Participation Student Writing Portfolio Imagine Learning  Teacher observations I-Ready   Performance Tasks  Classroom participation  Assessment Data  Performance Tasks  Assessment Data  Teacher observations  Classroom participation Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.)  Reading Software Leveled Literacy Intervention   ELA Test Sophistication Small group guided reading  Mathletics Software  GoMath leveled Instructional materials. Small Group Strategy lessons   Math Test   Sophistication  Amplify Science  Differentiated and Hands-on Activities Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group   One on One  Push-In  During the school day Select Saturdays  Small Group   One-on-One  Push-in Small Group   One-on-One  Push-in  During the school day Select Saturdays   During the school day 1 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.)  Classroom participation  Assessment Data  Teacher observations  Performance Tasks   Guidance Counselor School Psychologist Social Worker Speech, ENL, OT Teachers    Core Curriculum  Differentiated Activities    Students check in-check out, group conversations, role play, socialization activities Small Group   One-on-One  Push-In Small Group   One-on-One  Push-In  During the school day  Morningduring the school day  Afterschool  Select Saturdays 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 10 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Small group meetings, provide school supplies, book and uniforms, attend trips. We will also host family meetings and professional development for parents re: student progress and how to help their children. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. When a teacher is hired, their credentials are verified by the HR Director to ensure that the candidate posesses NYS certification in that license area. The BEDS survey is reviewed by the Principal and the HR Director who work with our school to ensure that every teacher’s assignment aligns with their license area so that all teachers are reported as Highly Qualified on the BEDS Survey. Strategies and activities used to recruit, retain and support highly qualified teachers are indicated below: ● Frequent communication with our Network HR Director when vacancies occur. ● Participating in Central Hiring Fair events where pre-screened HQT candidates are interviewed and recruited. ● Interviewing HQT candidates from The Open Market Hiring System and The Absent Teacher Reserve (ATR) Pool. ● Establishing a rigorous interview protocol that includes intensive criteria for the selection of new staff members including demonstration lessons, interviews, and New York State certification/licensing. ● Maintaining a professional library to promote promising and effective practices. ● Teachers will be provided with sample curriculum maps, instructional resources and professional learning opportunities to ensure that teachers improve teaching practice as per ADVANCE and Danielson and remain highly qualified and/or become highly qualified. ● New teachers are provided with a mentor. ● Teachers are encouraged to participate in Lunch and Learns, after-school PDs and to attend off-site workshops when appropriate. ● Individualized PD plans are created for teachers to ensure continued improvement. ● Carefully made teacher assignments are designed to match teacher talent with school needs. 5  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We have developed a comprehensive professional development plan that addresses CCLS, Danielson Framework for Effective Teaching, our instructional focus and school-wide goals. Professional development opportunities are differentiated based on the needs of groups of teachers and individual teachers. Our high quality professional development will includes, but not be limited to the following: ● Opportunities conducted by the Assistant Principal and Professional Development team in the content areas of ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies and how the Danielson framework can support teaching practices in the content areas. ● The Principal, AP , Professional Development team members and instructional lead teachers will attend workshops provided by the NYCDOE and Borough Field Office relating to effective instruction. They will turnkey the information and deliver workshops or Lunch and Learn to teachers and paraprofessionals in the use of DOK, Essential questions, ongoing assessment (formative and summative) to increase best practices and increase academic rigor in literacy, math, science and social studies aligned with CCLS. ● Teachers College for ELA and GoMath for Math will be supported through high quality professional development for teachers and paraprofessionals delivered by the Principal, AP, instructional leads or the outside educational consultant. Teacher teams will be in session each week for a minimum of 30 minutes, and will continue to be trained in how to use data effectively to create flexible grouping, track student performance trends and elevate programs and strategies in order to monitor and revise their practices Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 6  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We are a neighborhood school. We will enroll students from zoned neighborhoods. We will form a Pre-K-to-K Transition Team including the Principal, AP Early Childhood, School Counselor, IEP Teacher, the Parent Coordinator, The team will meet to track student data trends and evaluate overall readiness. Eligible students will be provided with early intervention services to address academic and social/emotional needs. During the year, Pre-K teacher teams and Kindergarten teacher teams will work collaboratively to evaluate curriculum for vertical and horizontal alignment through the lens of the Common Core Learning Standards to ensure a seamless transition from Pre-K to kindergarten. Our school embraces a Parents-As-Partners model through professional development opportunities and parent engagement activities that increase parent involvement, build parent effectiveness, deepen their understanding of CCLS while elevating high expectations for student learning. The Pre K-to-K Transition Team will act as the steering committee for this initiative by meeting regularly throughout the school year to monitor the process and suggest revisions to actions and strategies in order to ensure a smooth transition from the early childhood Pre K program to the Kindergarten elementary school program. teacher collaboration 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The MOSL team was a collaborative effort of the principal and Chapter Leader. Teachers voluntarily joined the MOSL team as recommended by both the principal and Chapter Leader. Members had sessions to learn about MOSL and the New ADVANCE teacher evaluation system and met several times to review all options. The principal’s decision, on the selection of the MOSL assessment measures, was informed by recommendations made by the MOSL team. Each month professional development is scheduled to provide professional development regarding the use of MOSL assessments and ADVANCE to improve instruction. In addition to MOSL, our school uses several appropriate assessment measures such as common pre and post unit assessments, predictive assessments, classroom assessments, and online assessments. Teacher Teams review at student work and track student performance trends to establish flexible grouping and to provide scaffolds and extensions to accelerate student learning. The school also uses multiple assessment measures to inform professional development opportunities that are scheduled throughout the year and are aligned with Danielson, the new Core Curriculum in ELA and Math and to build teacher capacity in the use of data assessment results to improve instructional practice. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 7  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 275,648 85,291 n/a n/a 3,222,490 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x x x x X Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, b, c, d, e X x x 5a, b, c, d, e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 8  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Roy Wilkins – PS 136Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of ESSA, , is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Roy Wilkins – PS 136Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  hosting back to school orientation for all students Pre-k, Kindergarten and Grades 1 - 5 ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 0  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy ESSA, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 1  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Roy Wilkins – PS 136Q School-Parent Compact (SPC) Roy Wilkins – PS 136Q in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of ESSA, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by ESSA; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 3  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 4  ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school as needed or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● demonstrate respect to school principal, assistant principal (s) and staff at all times; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● respect school rules, policies and procedures ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attending school regularly and arriving on time; ● completing my homework and submitting all assignments on time; ● following the school rules and being responsible for my actions; ● showing respect for myself, other people and property; ● trying to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always trying my best to learn. 5  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Title III program will provide English Language Learners and Immigrant students with an opportunity to learn, in a small group setting, the foundations (basic, intermediate or advanced) of the english language. *The program will take place afterschool Wednesday and Thursday for 2 hours and one Saturday a month which will include PD for staff *The program will be designed for ELL and Immigrant students in grades K - 5 *Students will be grouped according to grade, ability and their home language *Instruction will be in English, however, supplementary materials will be in the students' native languages as a means of assisting with the language acquisition via correlation and visuals *Two certified teachers will teach in the program, one of whom will be our ENL teacher and a lower and upper grade certified Common Branches or Special Education Teacher who has a documented track record of ENL professional development, providing students will hands on learning opportunities, who is nurturing, has excellent attendance and punctuality and who has worked with the age group / academic level in Literacy for at least 2 consecutive years. *Materials for the program will consist of Imagine Learning, Mastering Literacy and Math Skills workbook, non fiction dual language parent and student libraries in Spanish, Arabic and Haitian Creole (animals, numbers, colors, music, and jobs) and Levelled guided reading Library A - C and D- I and J - Z. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development for the teachers in the Title III programs will begin with 2 hours on Saturday training on Imagine Learning and utilizing the books - The language Rich Classroom - A research based framework for teaching english language learners by P. and W. Himmele, Academic Language for English Language learners and Struggling Readers by Y. and D. Freeman and Makking the Most of Small Groups - Differentiation for All by D. Miller. These books will provide teachers with a theoretical frame work for working with students whose home language is other than english. These books will remind teachers of best practices and expectations for beginner, intermediate and advance ELL and immigrant students Each month of the program, teachers will meet for one 3 hour session on Saturday for PD session, revisisting their initial work and then plan ahead, according to data collected thus far, and strategies and best practices discussed during PD . Our ELL teacher will also provide PD re: ELL strategies and Imagine Learning from workshops she attends at our BFSC in collaboration with District 29Q. 7  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Once a month on a Tuesday afternoon, parental engagement activities and workshops will be held. If parents are required to help their students, then they need to build their skills as they become more aware of strategies to use with their students and expectations of the school and society of all students including ELL and Immigrants. Additionally, parents will work on their English skills, technology skills and written communication skills. * Workshop presenter will be Program Supervisor and invited Guest from the community - to teach the process of becoming a citizen, HAUPE and other agencies will assist families with resources, Teachers will provide homework assistance workshops , Assistant Principal will conduct a writing workshop and the Parent Coordinator will provide information about navigating through New York, Queens and the Department of Education service. *At the initial, Parent Program orientation, parents will be informed of all the meetings. They will be asked to suggest topics for upcoming workshops. Then each week a notice will be sent home with students informing parents of the upcoming workshop. The work shop will last the duration of the program 3 hours. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. The program will run for 20 weeks: Teacher @ 2 hours for 3 days a week = $5,726 Supervisor @ 1 hour for 3 days a week=$579.12 monthly totally $2,895.60 N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Per Session 2 Teachers @ $ 50.13 Per Session 1 Administrator @$ 52.44 Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. PD will be in house and/or utllizing PD from day time offerings. Parent Workshops will be conducted by Administration or Volunteers from the community. Program will be technology based with the use of other N/A 8  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. materials to support learning. At this time there in no need to purchase any more materials.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) $3000 Travel Other TOTAL Free Trips will be provided $346.00 $11967.60 Imagine Learning Language Literacy Many local venues offer trips free of charge for ENL's students Refreshments for Parent Workshops $11967.60 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name The Roy Wilkins School Borough Queens School Number 136 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Tanya Walker Coach Ms. L. Powell (ELA) ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Zerin Rahman Teacher/Subject Area Ms. O. Branche (SE) Teacher/Subject Area Ms. B. Magloire (STEM) Related-Service Provider Ms. Hope Moore (OT Superintendent Ms. Beverly Mitchell Assistant Principal Ms. Teresa Wilkinson Coach Ms. J. Britton (Math) School Counselor Ms. Eliscia Singleton Parent Ms. S. Biggs Parent Coordinator Ms. Tiffany Matthew Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 627 0 Total number of ELLs 41 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.54%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At PS136Q, we use demographic and performance data to meet the needs of diverse and rapidly changing populations while educators use data from interim and annual assessments to gauge student progress and plan instruction. For instance, our school uses Fountas ans Pinnel in order to assess the early literacy skills of our ENLs. The data shows that most of our Entering students in Kindergarten- second grades are new to the country and do not have any letter - sound recognition skill in English. Most of our students in grade K through second are non-readers who are now exposed to different strategies in order to achieve letter knowkedge, phonemic awareness, decoding and fluency skills. At PS 136 teachers also uses other research based assessments in to determine individual student's needs, some of which include initial and ongoing reading assessments. These assessments provide teachers with the information needed to develop appropriate lessons and improve instruction for all students, including our ELL students. The information gained from appropriate assessment enables teachers to provide exceptional students with improved access to the general education curriculum. Also, scores help teachers plan programs that best fit ELL needs by allowing them to group like students for tailored learning activities, pair students at different proficiency 1  levels in class, or determine how much instructional time should be spent in the native language and English. LEP students who have not met the performance standard in reading , our ENL teachers Ms. Rahman and Ms. Laborde will use strategies to provide opportunities to read, write, listen, and speak in a variety of contexts. They will plan comprehension-building activities before, during, and after the reading, such as Picture walks, Making predictions, Visualizing, Ask and Answer Questions, Retell and Summarize, Context clues, Sounding out words, Chunking and Inferencing. In addition to that they will teach how to connect a text to students' experiences and knowledge which helps students personalize the information and remember information when they link it to their lives. Ms. Rahman and Ms. Laborde will also use word-attack strategies which will help students decode, pronounce, and understand unfamiliar words. She will use small group reading workshops followed by activity with discussions, strategies and reviews for comprehension. They would like to instruct these ENL students to develop sophisticated vocabulary knowledge. They would also work one to one to teach these students strategies to comprehend and analyze challenging texts to promote fluency. LEP students who have not met the performance standard in writing, our ESL teachers Ms.Rahman and Ms.Laborde will concentrate this year mainly on writing in different genres.The will use Imagine Learning (computer program) along with multiple strategies where the students will practice pre-writing steps - brainstorming, outlining, using graphic organizers, writing topic sentences or introductions, etc to create assignments.Students will practice writing essays, creative writing, journal writing, letters to others, etc. She will also provide enough time to practice writing in the content areas. Summarize, retell, argue, etc. Each of the writing assignment will finish with a revision activity to encourage good writing practice. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At PS 136Q we evaluate the success of the ENL programs throughout the number of ELL students who are reaching commanding level proficient on the NYSESLAT at the end of the school year. We also analyze the gains made by ENL's on the NYSESLAT in each modality from year to year until they reach commanding level of proficiency. In addition to that, the content area NYS exams in Science, ELA, and Math are continuously monitored from year to year through item analysis. Teaching strategies are regularly changed in order to address the gains their performances. To make AYP all the students including ELLs, take the state tests . Teachers also use Performace Based Assessment to assess ELLs' language proficiency and academic achievement. These assessments include both processes (Several drafts) and productsWriting pieces.Students are provided with a scoring rubric and checklist to evaluate and grade the students. We also have portfolios to assess student work throughout the year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Under universal screening all the ELL students went through HLIS survey which helps us to identify our ELLs' and also guide the teachers to choose proper instruction models. Next, our ELL students have to take part in RTI screening process to assess whether their literacy skills and competencies are meeting grade level benchmarks. At PS 136 second language (e.g., educational background) is considered when setting benchmarks and interpreting progress . At our school , we use data from the monthly assessments and running records to identify Tier II and III students. Tier 1 students are also identified through RTI. Our ESL teachers work in a group with tier II students . Tier II students receives one to one stand alone service by the ESL teacher. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores, there is an apparent pattern of high scores in Listening and Speaking and our students are receiving satisfactory scores in Writing under the new common core curriculum. Scores vary in Reading. We have 22 newcomers who are receiving 0-3 years of ENL service. For the beginning of this school year 2015-16, we have received a 2  goups of ENL students who are learning English as their new language.We have received five Arabic students whose NYSITELL scores shows they are at Entering level of their English language acquisition . We also have two Spanish and one Haitian student who was at their entering level of English language acquisition. under the NEWCOMER CATEGORY we also have 9 more students. Out of these nine students seven students are already at Expanding level of proficiency. From the other two students, one is in at emerging level and the other students is at entering levels. Both of them are from Haiti. In Spring 2016, five students scored at a commanding stage of language proficiency.Out of these commanding students three speaks Haitian / Creole and one student speak spanish. We have two students who are receiving ENL service fro 4-6 years. Both the students are at Commanding level of Language proficiency. Our NYSESLAT score shows that four students made it through commanding level .Five of our students had advanced to Commanding level of proficiency.The Home Language of three of these commanding students is haitian creole and one of the student Home Language is spanish. All the other students who took the NYSESLAT of Spring 2015 are at Expanding level of proficiency except one new comer who came to our school as a beginner in april of 2016. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Bi weekly ENL teachers will meet with the School Instructional Team. Additionally, a teacher team has been established review data, research strategies and look at trends of ENL students, in an effort to make adjustments to our ENL program. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding English as a new language (ENL) programs provide instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. Students in freestanding ENL programs can come from many different language backgrounds, and English may be the only common language among the students. Our school is aware of the fact that As per CR Part 154, there are 2 types of ENL: • Stand-alone ENL is instruction to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. A student may not receive stand-alone ENL in lieu of core content area instruction. • Integrated ENL is instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction. It is delivered by a dually certified teacher (ENL and a content area) or co-teaching by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies). Both methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. All ELLs and former ENLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status must receive a minimum number of units of integrated ENL. In our school we have Stand -alone ENL instruction delivered by a certified ENL teachers Ms. Rahman and Ms. Laborde. At P.S 136Q, ENL is delivered in Push-in model. Our ENL teacher works with ELLs in collaboration with general education classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. There is a common preparation time between the 2 teachers and/or prior collaborative lesson. ESL atudents are grouped together according to their levels of proficiency in order to provide them with appropriate instructions.Some of our ELL students are receiving both push -in and pull -out services in order to meet CR part 154.According to push-in model our ENL teacher plans carefully with general education teachers to ensure curricular alignment .The ELL teacher focuses on the efforts students put forth to learn the academic language of each discipline. In pull out model ELLs who spend the majority of their day in all-English content instruction are brought together from various classes for English-acquisition-focused instruction. In our school we would provide ELL pull-out 3  only during social studies and science so that the ELL teachers could work on concept development and vocabulary in those areas. Our pull-out programs that focus on teaching English through academic content and developing higher-level thinking skills make a difference because it is implemented by a high-quality teacher. Her goal had been to develop language proficiency, usually, by using the content subject matter that students might study in the future or had missed at some point. The pull-out aspect of the model enables students to have individualized instruction in a small group environment. During the sessions, each student is able to engage in listening, speaking, reading and writing as facilitated by the ENL teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In 2017-2018 ELLs based on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT; the fifth level, proficient/commanding, continues to indicate the student is not an ELL. The levels are Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and commanding. The Entering and Emerging ELLS will receive two units of study per week or 360 mins per week. Transitioning and Expanding ELLs will receive one unit of study per week or 180 minutes. Commanding or former ELLs will receive two years of ELL service.They will receive 90 minutes per week. At PS 136 we make sure that instrutional minutes are delivered for each program model. Our ENL teacher collaborate and co-plan with the classroom teacher with ESL students to provide Integrated ENL. At our school ESL students with Entering level of proficiency receive 180 min. of Integrated ENL in ENL/ELA, our Imerging students receives 180 mins of Integrated ENL, Our trainsitioning students receive 90 mins. , our Expanding students receive 180 mins of instructions. Our ENL teacher also provide 180 mins of Stand Alone instruction to Entering studentsand 90 mins. of Stand Alone instruction for Emerging students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Program Model: The goals of the ENL program are as follows: _Engage all students in at least one literacy task and one math task aligned to strategically selected CCSS. Part V: ELL Programming -In literacy, students will complete a task that asks them to read and analyze informational texts and write opinions and arguments in response. • Provide academic content-area instruction in English using ENL methodology and instructional strategies and using native language support to make content comprehensible. • Incorporate ENL strategic instruction. • Assist students to achieve the state-designated level of English proficiency for their grade. • Help ELLs meet or exceed New York State and City standards. In freestanding ENL programs, language arts are taught using ESL and ELA methodologies. Content areas are taught in English using ENL strategies. Native language support is provided by using bilingual picture dictionaries and multicultural bilingual picture books. In keeping with the practices of the previous administration and LAP Team, we are implementing the Three (3) Blocks Framework for Language Development. We believe that this structure is highly successful in helping students acquire English proficiency and is also flexible enough that it can be differentiated to meet individual student needs. Block 1 – Language and Word Study: Its focus is on the development of the students’ word study skills. Teachers use quality literature, poetry, and texts to develop language. We rely on children hearing models of spoken language to help develop their academic language. Word study involves phonics, spelling, and vocabulary development. 4  Block 2 – Reading Workshop: Incorporates guided reading, independent reading, read aloud, and literature study. (Use of mini lessons) Block 3 -Writiing Workshop: It involves writing and reading on a daily basis. Students are encouraged to make the reading/writing connection. a. Guided Writing – teacher develops small groups to discuss various aspects of writing. b. Independent writing – students work individually on their own writing. Daily mini lessons are offered based on the needs of the students 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? PS136Q ensures all English as a New Language Learners are appropriately evaluated in their native languages by providing them translated NYS exams and word to word translated glossaries. If translated exams are not available in an ELL's native language, the Translation Unit is called to provide oral translation during State Exams. ESL classroom has bilingual books in students' native languages. At PS136Q library also carry bilingual books and dictionaries to support our new comers. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The ESL department works diligently to meet both the individual and collective needs of ELL students. Subgroups (such as SIFE and newcomers) that are in the first and second stages of language acquisition are instructed through Total Physical Response (TPR). The teacher uses body language to support verbal cues, thereby familiarizing students with basic commands. Visual aids, such as pictures, charts, graphs and manipulatives are also very helpful to this group. Students in the third stage of language development (SIFE and Newcomers) participate in cooperative learning. Group discussions, role-paying and paired activities are often a part of instruction for this cluster. Small group instruction focuses on sharpening specific modalities and new concepts are delivered through scaffolding. The teacher may also bridge a student’s prior knowledge with a new concept so that the student more easily understands. Modeling is used at every stage of language expansion. At stages four and five, advanced students (ELLs in year 4-6) participate in activities that require greater critical analysis. Students keep active writing journals and are encouraged to write, rewrite and edit their work. Advanced students participate in group reading and sustained silent reading. They respond critically to the literature and are prompted to create their own literary works for publication. Special needs students are presented with the same curriculum and participate in similar activities; however, assignments are modified so that students can successfully meet the requirements. Instructions are broken down into simpler steps. The teacher models the action, thinks aloud, and relies on forms of scaffolding to help teach new concepts. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The majority of our ELL with SWD students are in 12:1:1 Special Education classes or CTT class. The ENL program model for these classes is push-in and pull-out. IN a 12:1:1 Special Education class has one fully certified special education teacher and two to three teaching assistants. The students support services vary from OT, PT, speech, individual counseling, SETSS for ENLs with IEP and ESL. During push-in model, ESL teacher use various scaffolding strategies to enhance students' reading, writing, and language skills. The scaffolding strategies include but are not limited to visual support such as graphic organizers, manipulatives, and TechnologySmart Boards). 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ENL teachers and administration work collaboratively to determine the academic needs of our ELL- SWD to achieve their IEP goals and to serve them in the least restrictive environment. All teachers who serve SWDs in PS136Q are encouraged to either have a copy of student's IEP, or to check the student's IEP regularly and change their lesson plan accordingly. The 5  classroom teachers instruct their students with differentiated/scaffolded instruction with support from the ENL teachers. Testing modifications are made for all ELL students in every subgroup. Special Education ENLs are tested separately and provided time and half or double time according to their IEPs for test-taking as well as a second reading of instructions. Students with disabilities (such as hearing or vision impairment) receive all necessary accommodations through the DOE testing headquarters. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At PS 136 we use different intervention programs for ENL in ELA, math and other content areas for our ENLs in different subgroups.When our ELL teacher pushes-in to classroom during classroom lessons,she adds strategies and assistance to students. ENL's are provided vocabulary instruction prior to the units introduced in the content-area classroom. They are also given background info when needed and frequent use of manipulatives and visuals to enhance comprehension. Students use of bilingual dictionaries when applicable. Literacy is instructed in small groups at the students' instructional level. Vocabulary development and concept work is done in social studies and science in pull-out format. The math coach works with clusters of ELL students who have not passed the NYS Math Assessment at each grade level. For Math, for our ENLs we go over vocabulary words in context, use lots of visuals for mathematical operations. We also use strategies like repetition and review for multiplication facts in small group instruction. In our school we use Prentice Hall Regents ENL program which is based on recent research in second language acquisition , in reading and literacy.It has adapted and incorporated widely accepted theories and proven methods, especially those of Krashen and Terrell's natural approach, as well as the whole language and language experience approach. This approach also integrates Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing across the curriculum and a wealth of activities and program components reinforces and extends new language skills and content knowledge. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year our school is going to continue with the ReadyGen Reading and Writing programs which has an ELL component to support our ENL students. We continue to use Ready gen from through K-5 this year too. We are also grouing to use a new and improved Math program called Envision Math Program. This math program also has an ELL component and a home school connection.Both programs supports and alligned with the CCLS. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not going to discontinue any program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The ELL population is encouraged to participate in various sports, clubs and other social activities. They are informed of specific events such as Father's Third Thursday and basketball Tournament for fathers, Fitness and Wellness Workshops for mothers, and Parent Summit and Local Resource fair to improve attendance in our school. Last year we offered afterschool club like Ballroom Dance, Basketball club, Modern dance, Musical Theatre, Zumba and Piano and Recorder clun. Our ENL students participated during these afterschool activities which promote their Language acquision ans social interaction. This year we would like to offer ELL afterschool with Title III. Our ELL students and their parents are also invited to attend Back to School Day and Night to get information about their progress. The invitations are translated into their Home Languages. In our School our ELL students also participate in different club activities like Twins club, Boys club, Tennis team, Art club, Dance Club in order to help students develop their talents and hobbies. In October, in our school we encouraged our ELL students to participate in the Literacy Character Day Parade which helps children grow socially and academically. We also make sure our ELLs' participate in our Community Read, Writing Celebrations, Recycling assembly and Students Council Election Assembly. We also work together for achievement in homework help, hands on learning experience,and activities to promote social interaction . 6  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Technology is also used as a tool for our ENLs. In technology classroom our students receive opportunities to connect words with visual images. In ENL classrooms students also have access to computers, audio CD's, music to enhance learning, manipulatives and electronic dictionaries. Our ELL teacher use certain websites which will help students understand content through video, images, etc. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Bilingual picture dictionaries and books are available to all ENLs . Students are always encouraged to bring materials in their native languages. In our school we mostly have Spanish and Haitian Creole ENL students . Our commanding students are also provide to buddy up with their native speaker who needs help in transitioning. At our school our entering students are encouraged to respond in their native language and these responses and celebrated as part of the learning process and as a bridge towards language acquistion. Bilingual stuffs are also a great recourse for our ELL students and their families. At PS 136Q we understand that to maintain a quality programs and to serve our ENL students appropriately ,we consider the different entry level abilities in English that our ELL students have in our instruction . Some English Language Learners who come to school with oral and written skills; we can use this skill to promote learners' academic achievement because Native language literacy abilities can assist ELL students from academic materials and experiences in English. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. This year at PS 136 we are using LEVELED LITERACY INTERVENTION. The Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention System (LLI) is a small-group, supplementary intervention program designed to help teachers provide powerful, daily, small-group instruction for the lowest achieving children in the early grades. Our English language learners can also benefit from LLI because each LLI lesson provides specific suggestions for supporting English language learners. At our schools , the School Support Team meets on a regular basis in to evaluate and assure that all students support services are being met and on target. This team makes suggestions in order to ensure that these goals are met. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Technology is also used as a tool for our ELNs. In technology classroom our students receive opportunities to connect words with visual images. In ENL classrooms students also have access to computers, audio CD's, music to enhance learning, manipulatives and electronic dictionaries. Our ELL teacher use certain websites which will help students understand content through video, images, etc. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students and their parents are always encouraged to visit the school prior to New School Year. The Supervisors are available through the summer. At this time we are not offering any activities in our school that assist newly enrolled ENLs, before neginning of the school year. At our school we offer a welcoming reception for all ENL students and their families in September. At this meetings we encourage our new ENLs and their families to pair up with another student and their families who shared the same language , to help in their transition into a new culture . They are also going to participate in our afterschool program which is designed specifically for ENL's. We will have monthly Parent meeting with translators to help parents become acclimated to the school work, norms and school culture. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this moment PS 136 is not offering any language electives to ELLs'. 7  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers will also receive ongoing professional development from the PD coordinator so that they can learn how to incorporate ENL strategies and techniques into their classrooms and modify their lessons.The ENL teachers meets with the teachers of her ENL's to detemine how they can best implement programs and strategies that will help the ELL students in their content areas. Also, each Faculty conference and grade meeting discuss professional topics such as the use of assessments and students' varied learning styles. These meetings are attended by the Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor, content area teachers, special education teachers and paraprofessionals. Attendance is taken at these meetings. Our ENL teachers Ms. Rahman and Ms. Laborde are going to attend workshop from the ELL instructional Leadership Institute (BFS) and then turn key with all the teachers of ENLs in order to provide them information on the framework for great schools EILI. These sessions will be planned during Mondays professional day sessions. Our ENL teachers receives rigorous, research-based professional development throughout the year to achieve success for ENLs. Schools also utilize various options available for high quality professional development based on SSO. Also, the Office of ENLs partners with nationally renowned experts to provide a variety of professional development institutes throughout the year which we utilize. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Several members of the Language Allocation Policy Team, such as the Guidance Counselor, the ENL Teacher, the AIS/Literacy Coach and the Special Education Administrator work cooperatively to provide support for students transitioning from the elementary to the secondary level of school.Our guidance counselor, Ms. Wallace, has individualized articulation with the students. She also sends mailings to homes, in multiple languages,and informs parents about upcoming open house events and high school fairs. Staff can also get information from the Office of English Language Learners and/or through UFT provided workshops. Our Guidance Counselor conducts staff workshops on elementary students transition and academic class requirements during the school year and during class visitations. The Guidance Counselor addresses the social adjustments that a transitioning student must make for the new environment. Based on test results and classroom performance, the ENL teachers determines if the student needs extended ENL support in Middle School. A review and updating of IEPs for Special Education ENLs’ help determine what assistance will be necessary for the next level. According to the new regulation PS 136 Q will provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Our school will make sure our English as a new language teacher will receive a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours in language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. All 8  agendas and attendance will be kept in a secured place in the office. Our ENL teacher have attended a workshop on Integrated ENL and Stand alone ENL in order to properly meet the professional development requirement . This work shop facilitated by EILI, also focused on how to co-plan successfully for our ENL. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? According to the new regulation P.S. 136Q will set up time during the month of December of every year to individually meet with the parents or guardians of English language learners at , in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings. The purpose of this annual individual meetings are to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. At PS 136Q we will make sure this additional meeting should include child's ENL teacher and child's classroom teacher to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English. Our school will make sure these meetings are conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. Our schools will determine the manner and form of such individual parent meetings, in accordance with collective bargaining agreements.Our school will record attendances and keep them in a secured location. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by: • providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; • providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; • fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; • providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; • sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; • providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. According to Dr. Lily Wong Fillmore “Students who are classified as ELLs are usually grouped for instruction. The instruction they are given is generally pitched at a lower level than instruction provided for English proficient students.The texts used in such classes are usually less complex, less informative, and less demanding than those ordinarily used. As a result such texts rarely if ever provide any exposure to the kind of language students need to learn and use in carrying out academic work; less is asked and expected of students in such classes, and many of them lose hope in making academic progress, and sadly– –their faith in their own ability to learn.” The writer of CCLS David Coleman and Susan Pimentel addressed the same issue when they depicted that at the heart of these criteria are instructions for shifting the focus of literacy instruction to center 9  on careful examination of the text itself. In aligned materials, work in reading and writing (as well as speaking and listening) must center on the text under consideration. The standards focus intently on students reading closely to draw evidence from the text and are emphatic about students reading texts of adequate range and complexity.We need to shift the criteria of reading, writing, speaking and listening where text materials should build a coherent body of knowledge within and across grades . This material also helps to develop academic vocabulary prevalent in complex texts throughout reading, writing, listening, and speaking instruction. In order to be successful we need to use scaffolding techniques which will enable our students to experience the complexity of the text, rather than avoid it. It will also make the text the focus of instruction and avoid features that distract from the text. 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Tanya S.T. Walker, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Roy Wilkins School School DBN: 29q136 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ms. Tanya Walker Title Principal Ms. Teresa Wilkinson Assistant Principal Ms. Tiffany Matthews Parent Coordinator MS. Zerin Rahman ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Gross Hall Parent Ms. Odessa Branche Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Barabara Magloire Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Lorraine Powell Ms. Jennifer Britton Coach Coach Ms. Dale Wallace School Counselor Mr. Lenon Murray Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Ms. Hope Moore Other OT Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/24/16 06/24/16 06/24/16 06/24/16 06/24/16 06/24/16 06/24/16 06/24/16 06/24/16 06/24/16 06/30/16 1/1/01 06/24/161 1/1/01 1/1/01 2 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Roy Wilkins School Superintendent: Mitchell, Beverly DBN: 29Q136 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Zerin Rahman ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon arrival / registration at PS 136Q, all families are required to complete a Home Language Indentification Survey. In this survey, the first eight questions determine whether or not students are eligible for ENL services. This data also provides the school with information regarding the family's need for written and oral communication in their home language. After review of the documents by our Pupil Personnel Secretary and ENL teachers, students are identified and subsequently, all documents sent home are then translated into the home language and sent on the same day as the non translated correspondence. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 3  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Haitian /Creole Arabic Bengali French 24 685 10 11 1 1 3.28% 93.58% 1.37% 1.5% .014 .14 23 684 11 10 1 3 3.14% 93.44% 1.5% 1.37% 0.14 .41 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families The documents that our schools typically disseminates are Parent- teacher meeting announcements,Registration, application and selection,Safety and health , parent teacher conferences,Citywide ELL parent meetings and any welcome letters. September October November December January February March April May How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All documents will be translated via google translator, DOE translation unit and personnel. At the beginning of each month ENL teachers in coordination with secretaries will prepare all letter appropriately and ensure their distribution accordingly. 4  N/A N/A N/A June N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent-teacher-conference,Annual Title I Parent Meeting ,ELL parent orientation, Tuesday parent involvement day, parent workshops, Back to school Night, PTA and SLT meetings. n/A N/A N/A September October November December January February March April May June N/A N/A N/A provide interpretation service(s)? We will utilize personnel and the DOE translation unit personnel N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Call using school personnel and the DOE translation unit. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure5  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Opening Conference, Daily Announcements, Staff Handbook and Weekly Notes Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school will make sure these posters and guides are available for ELL parents .Our schools will make sure there are poster in different languages(Haitian Creole, Spanish and Arabic) are visible near the main entrance. We will secure the Language ID Guide at the security desk and in main office to guide the parents through proper languages support. Parents of English Language Learners needing translation services will receive correspondence in their identified home language. The translation team is notified immediately regarding the need for written and / or oral translation services. Members of the translation team are available during all parent meetings, workshops and orientations to support parents of English Language Learners. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gather feed back from our parents on the quality and availability of services we will continue to use Parent Survey and program selection form s. During our annual one to one meeting with the parents we will discuss about the service (ENL) at our school . We ail also discuss information regarding other services like transitional bilinguall program and bilingual program that is available in the city. 6 
