 30Q151 School Name: P.S. 151 MARY D. CARTER Principal: SAMANTHA MAISONET   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Mary D. Carter 343000010151 PK – 5 School Number (DBN): 30Q151 50-05 31 Avenue, Woodside, NY 11377 718-728-2676 718-545-2028 Phone Number: Diane Costello Fax: Email Address: dcostello@schools . nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Dr. Samantha B. Maisonet Sandra E. Rodriguez Elizabeth Lugo Diane Costello Xochitl Monroy N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 30 Dr. Philip Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, LIC, NY 11101 Superintendent’s Office Address: pcompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-391-8323 Phone Number: 718-391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) North Queens Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, LIC, NY 11101 LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Dr. Samantha B. Maisonet Sandra E. Rodriguez Elizabeth Lugo N/A Xochitl Monroy N/A N/A N/A Zoe Bouratoglou Diane Costello Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Teacher/Chairperson Member/   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Emily Perez Candace Profit Vaniqua Hudson MaysaIsmail Parent Parent Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview PS151Q’s mission statement is as follows: “The Global Communication and Foreign Language Magnet School celebrates the rich heritage of our students, builds their academic knowledge within a collaborative and challenging environment, and prepares them morally and ethically for global citizenship."   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Mary D. Carter School is located in southwest Queens in a district that is ethnically diverse. This learning community is represented by more than 25 countries speaking more than 10 languages. Thirteen percent of the population are English as a New Language Students (ENLs). Additionally, twenty-six percent of our population are students with disabilities. High standards are set in all classrooms with the goal of having students receive differentiated instruction that is unique to each of their needs in a supportive environment. As per the 2017 -18 School Quality Guide , our school exceeds the Citywide Average in common core shifts in literacy and math; quality of student discussion; inclusive instructional practices; professional development; school commitment; safety; and social emotional learning. Our parent coordinator in unison with the parents of our Parent Association (PA), provide workshops and other parent activities to increase parent involvement and increase their understanding on areas such as; The Common Core Standards, test sophistication, and social and emotional needs. To ensure the success of PS151Q’s vision, the school implements various initiatives and works collaboratively with a variety of organizations that are listed below. Strong Practices The October 2017 Principal's Performance Observation (PPO) stated that the administration has done some strategic work with teachers in evaluating the results from the New York State (NYS) assessments. School programs have been aligned to ensure that all grades have a common preparation period to meet and allow for flexibility in participating in peer inter-visitations. The January 2018 PPO stated that changes made have strengthened English Language Arts (ELA) and the overall instructional program this year to significantly improve the mind-set of students and staff. There were clear systems and structures that were consistent and visible across all classrooms that included a vocabulary component, a mini lesson with explicit modeling, an example and practice time to try another problem together and a majority of the time for students to practice independently or in groups. The foundation for our work at P.S. 151Q, which is to work collaboratively with families, educators and communities, is aligned to the vision of the chancellor. Since all stakeholders work together to improve student achievement, it continues to be important to collaborate with the school community to achieve a goal and action plan determined from the data. Intervisitation of model classrooms by District 30 principals assisted in highlighting next steps. International Baccalaureate Organization PS 151Q has received certification as an International Baccalaureate (IB) World School making us the only elementary school in Queens with this status. Our school has created six trans disciplinary, inquiry based units per grade which integrate the areas of Social Studies, Science and ELA. The IB philosophy incorporated in the units focuses on the whole child and highlights attitudes and learner profiles. 0  Sanford Harmony Program The goal of the Sanford Harmony Program (SHP) is to incorporate specialized teaching strategies into classroom activities from preschool through sixth grade in an effort to reduce bullying, and help develop the youth of today into tolerant, compassionate, and caring adults for the future.This program was included in the two previous year's Comprehensive Education Plan (CEP) goal of "providing a supportive environment" and was successfully met. We have chosen to continue to use the SHP throughout the next school year. The Sanford Harmony Program is incorporated into lesson plans and is aligned with Common Core state standard, national, and district learning initiatives. City University of New York (CUNY) Creative Arts (CAT) Team Astor Grant This year the Astor grant continues to work in partnership with teachers to improve reading skills in the early grades among under resourced New York City (NYC) schools. This grant provided: professional development to teachers on the use of interactive drama strategies that support higher order reading skills; in class residencies led by CAT staff to model the work; on site mentoring to support teachers as they develop lesson plans and reapply the skills they have learned; and literacy focused workshops that support parents to be active teachers for their children. The grant has been approved to continue instruction for the next school year. Team Teaching As a result of all teachers participating in Team Teaching Professional Development we continue to be committed to the improvement of P.S. 151’s classroom collaboration. This training assisted the staff in engaging in the work of Friends and Cook on Collaborative Team Teaching . Teachers learned the various approaches to team teaching including station teaching and alternative teaching. Speech Literacy Support Initiative Our school participates in the Speech Literacy Support Initiative, a program developed by the Division of Specialized Instruction and Student Support (DSISS) to provide intensive early literacy instruction to kindergarten and first grade students. Through this program, experienced speech therapists work closely with school administrators and classroom teachers, using evidence-based materials provided by DSISS. The goal is to provide our early learners with the foundational building blocks needed to become successful readers, listeners, and speakers. The Initiative also provides an opportunity for participating speech and classroom teachers to share their experiences applying these best practices with other teachers school-wide so that all students benefit. Technology: Real-time Formative Assessment Classrooms use technology practices to assess student learning in the moment. The use of Activexpression, Plickers, etc, allows students to enter a multiple choice response or type in a short response based on questions developed by the classroom teacher. Teachers use the data to discuss incorrect answers, reteach concepts that students demonstrate difficulty with, and use the data collected to plan lessons targeted to the learning needs of the whole class and small group. NYC Intervisitation Protocol Implementation of the NYC protocol for intervisitation for teachers was put in place in order to: - build an understanding of Danielson’s Framework for Teaching (particularly components 3b, 3c, and 3d); 1  - build an understanding of their shared instructional vision of using formative assessments to guide and differentiate their instruction so that they may meet the needs of all of their students; - share best practices and to enhance their toolbox of instructional strategies Social Emotional Developmental Health P.S. 151Q has the benefit of having Western Queens Consultation Center housed in our building. Students and families have access to mental health counselors and social workers to support them on a daily basis. Students and families also have access to our own Guidance Counselor and Social Worker. NY Smile This program is a Department of Health initiative committed to providing access to high quality affordable dental care and to improving the oral health of our community. It is also an opportunity for parents to have their children examined by a certified dental health professional to determine the state of his/her dental health so that recommendations can be made. This program is a comprehensive, innovative solution serving to build trust and deliver value. NYC Kids Rise This resource is a scholarship and savings program to make college more accessible and achievable for every NYC public school student. D. 30 has been the first NYC district to participate. Title III Supplementary Services A program was developed for immigrant students who as newcomers overlap and also make up our population of English as a New Language (ENL). This instructional service is designed to assist immigrant students in achieving a successful graduation rate from elementary schools in the US by way of an introduction to the educational system and additionally improving teaching and learning in core subject areas. The Reading Wizards program is designed to support struggling 1st and 2nd grade readers. The program incorporates a multi-sensory learning environment using evidence based phonics intervention. The program is taught by two (one monolingual one bilingual) NYS licensed and American Speech-Language- Hearing Association certified Speech-Language Pathologists. Both have experience implementing effective strategies for reading instruction. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our population consists of 24.8% of Students with Special Needs; and 12.3% of English Language Learners. In order to meet the needs of diverse learners, teachers are supported in their lesson planning to develop methods and locate materials to meet the learning needs of students by providing multiple points of access for Special Needs and English as a New Language (ENL) learners. Teachers model, incorporate small group learning, facilitate discussions, and plan effective learning sequences to provide access points to diverse learners. Scaffolding, as well as other methods of differentiation is used to support diverse learners, including Special Education and ENL students to explain and justify their thinking. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2  The element where our school continues to make progress and exceeds the city is the Instructional Leadership strand of Effective School Leadership (98%) in the 2017-18 School Quality Guide as stated: 100% of teachers say that the principal makes clear to the staff her expectations for meeting instructional goals 94% of teachers say that curriculum, instruction,and learning materials are well coordinated across different grade levels 96% of parents feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school There are 2 key area of focus: Parent Involvement (93%) - up 3% from last year but equal to the city average; and meeting State standards on the NYS ELA and Math tests. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q151 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 381 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 25 25 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 18 18 6 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 87.4% % Reduced Lunch 11.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.6% 51.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 6.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.25 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 43.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 90% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 66 66 18 93.4% 5.5% 24.4% 23.9% 16.3% 1.6% 4 3% 6.1 34.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS As per our 2017-18 School Quality Guide findings in the Common Core shift in ELA and Math the following areas exceeded the district and city averages: 100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that in planning their last instructional unit they had the resources and tools needed. 94% of teachers responded that a lot or all of their students feel challenged. PRIORITY NEEDS As per our 2017-18 School Quality Guide findings in Course Clarity the following areas are in need of improvement and were chosen as a goal. 79% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes build on each others ideas during class discussion. 76% of teachers responded that a lot or all of their students provide constructive feedback to their peers. 5  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in K-5 will prepare for and participate in a range of conversations and collaborations with the ability to express ideas clearly and persuasively as measured by a 10% increase in the Course Clarity component of the School Quality Guide. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monitor progress using skill specific checklist as needed - a minimum of 6x per year Gr K-5 Sep 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Administration Collaborative grade reflection - looking at observational evidence of student progress 6x per year The use of PD to target specific instructions of speaking and listening Establish a grade specific "on demand" listening and speaking pre-assessment task In order to meet the needs of diverse learners, teachers are supported in their lesson planning to develop methods and locate materials to meet the learning needs of students by providing multiple points of access for Special Needs and ENLs. Teachers model, incorporate small group learning, facilitate discussions, and plan effective learning sequences to provide access points to diverse learners. Scaffolding, as well as other methods of differentiation is used to support diverse learners, including Special Education and ENL students to explain and justify their thinking. The dedicated use of Parent Engagement Time allows for information to be dispersed to parents by all staff members. The parent coordinator, in order to inform the community, will receive professional development during the fall and spring term by the Field Support Center (FSC) and school administrators. Translation services will be used to provide the information to parents in the home language. The parent coordinator and principal collaborate with the Parent Association (PA) during monthly meetings to increase parent awareness of student activities. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement SWD, ENL Population Sep 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Administration Gr. K-5 Gr K-5 Sep 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Administration, Cluster Teachers, Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Staff, ENL Teachers, Parent Coordinator 7  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The dedicated use of Parent Engagement Time allows for information to be dispersed to parents by all staff members. The parent coordinator, in order to inform the community, will receive professional development during the fall and spring term by the Field Support Center (FSC) and school administrators. Translation services will be used to provide the information to parents in the home language. The parent coordinator and principal collaborate with the Parent Association (PA) during monthly meetings to increase parent awareness of student activities. Sep 2018- June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Administration, Cluster Teachers, Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Staff, ENL Teachers, Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher teams and the pedagogical leadership team view the results of observational evidence collected during the IB unit class discussion. These teams meet weekly and use the information to develop instructional plans of action, which focusing on instructional shifts. Professional development is conducted by the Instructional Coordinator along with the Administration on a monthly basis throughout the school year utilizing the NYS Next Generation ELA Learning Standards. A schedule will be established for the computer lab to provide some of the resources needed to work toward this goal. Bimonthly meetings are conducted in order to instruct the parents in CCLS and IB units. These meetings give the parent community the tools necessary to support their children’s learning; translation services are provided at these meetings. Our school continuously monitors programs, actions and strategies described in the above section to ensure that they meet the intent and purpose of the Federal and State programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of our eligible students are met. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, a survey will be given to determine if a minimum of 80% of K-5 teachers will feel that a lot or all of the students in their classes build on each others ideas during class discussion and provide constructive feedback to their peers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher made checklists and rubrics specific to speaking and listening. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? STRENGTHS As per our 2017-18 School Quality Snapshot the school establishes a culture where students feel safe, challenged to grow, and supported to meet high expectations. The survey showed that 93% responded positively to questions about a Supportive Environment. The diversity of PS151Q's population is valued through the use of the IB profiles. Activities and lessons are geared to address different learning styles and to support students' social-emotional well being. With the use of The Sanford Harmony Program (SHP) teachers are provided with a set of tools that foster and support social emotional connections among students and that develop positive peer relationships that will enable them to thrive in school. An IB Emporium was developed with prizes available for good behavior / display of IB attitudes; strong work ethic / effort; a certain number of days with 100% homework. These prizes are not intended to reward students for ONE positive event or incident. They are meant as rewards that they are earning within a behavior system you have established in your classroom. PRIORITY NEEDS As per our 2017-18 School Quality Guide findings the classroom behavior strand of Supportive Environment is in need of improvement and was chosen as a goal for this school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the specific Grade 4 and 5 students receiving at-risk counseling in September 2018 will decrease by 20% in order to continue to foster a supportive environment. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Implementation of PBIS explicit instruction lessons regarding prosocial behaviors Gr. 4 - 5 Sep 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Administration, SIT members Staff training in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS) Conduct weekly student support team meetings to look at and reflect on discipline behaviors Build in tiered interventions for students who need special behavior and counseling plans that will increase a positive and safer school culture and climate Provide expectations to parents in the school newsletter, monthly calendar, and during PA meetings Collaborate with the school's partnership with Western Queens Counseling Services that provide at-risk interventions and individual counseling sessions to students experiencing conflicts, mental health problems, and self esteem issues In order to meet the needs of diverse learners, teachers are supported in their lesson planning to develop methods and locate materials to meet the learning needs of students by providing multiple points of access for Special Needs and ENLs. Teachers model, incorporate small group learning, facilitate discussions, and plan effective learning sequences to provide access points to diverse learners. Scaffolding, as well as other methods of differentiation is used to support diverse learners, including Special Education and ENL students to explain and justify their thinking. The dedicated use of Parent Engagement Time allows for information to be dispersed to parents by all staff members. The parent coordinator, in order to inform the community, will receive professional development during the fall and spring term by the Field Support Center (FSC) and school administrators. Translation services will be used to provide the information to parents in the home language. The parent coordinator and SWD, ENL Population Sep 2018-June 2019 Gr.4 - 5 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Administration, SIT members Gr. 4 - 5 Sep 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Administration, Cluster Teachers, Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Staff, 0  principal collaborate with the Parent Association (PA) during monthly meetings to increase parent awareness of student activities. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement ENL Teachers, Parent Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The dedicated use of Parent Engagement Time allows for information to be dispersed to parents by all staff members. The parent coordinator, in order to inform the community, will receive professional development during the fall and spring term by the Field Support Center (FSC) and school administrators. Translation services will be used to provide the information to parents in the home language. The parent coordinator and principal collaborate with the Parent Association (PA) during monthly meetings to increase parent awareness of student activities. Sep 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Administration, Cluster Teachers, Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Staff, ENL Teachers, Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The SIT will provide training materials and ongoing feedback and support. Teacher teams and the pedagogical leadership team will view the results of a self assessment survey to gain a deeper understanding of pedagogical practices. School programs are aligned to ensure that all grades have a common prep time to meet and allow for flexibility in intervisitation. The Principal and Assistant Principal attend and facilitate weekly team meetings for all teams to ensure that sufficient planning time is provided, and that the necessary modifications to the curriculum are taking place. Units and tasks will be evaluated and discussed by the teams and Administration. Bimonthly meetings are conducted in order to instruct the parents in how the IB units, TCIS and the PBIS implementations are aligned. These meetings give the parent community the tools necessary to support their children’s learning; translation services are provided at these meetings. Our school continuously monitors programs, actions and strategies described in the above section to ensure that they meet the intent and purpose of the Federal and State programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of our eligible students are met. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1  By January 2019, the number of Gr 4 and 5 students attending at risk counseling will have decreased by 10%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Self assessment survey, classroom rewards system and school Social Worker program schedule and logs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS As per our 2017-18 School Quality Guide findings 100% of the teachers stated that at their school the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively. PRIORITY NEEDS As per our 2017-8 School Quality Guide findings the Quality of Professional Development strand was in need of improvement. Our goal is to: Reorganize teachers professional learning time Support teacher implementation of the goal setting process, and monitor implementation Continue to provide opportunities for teachers to collaborate on the implementation of CCLS /Next Generation based instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, 20% of teachers will participate in at least one inter-visitation that aligns to their professional goal as measured by attendance & reflection sheets. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Organize teachers by cohorts specific to pedagogical interests based on survey  Provide common preps to allow for collaborative Gr K-5 conversation about instruction and implementation of new ideas Interclass/inter-school visitations 2x per year In class support by Instructional Leadership Team Scheduled mentoring by Instructional Coach and Administration weekly     Grade level planning weekly throughout the year  Mid year and end of year Share Fair across cohorts Sep 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Cluster Teachers, AIS Staff, ENL Teachers, Administration In order to meet the needs of diverse learners, teachers work collaboratively across all grades during common preps. This time provides them with the planning that is needed to develop methods and locate materials to meet the learning needs of students by providing multiple points of access for Special Needs and ENLs. Teachers model, incorporate small group learning, facilitate discussions, and plan effective learning sequences to provide access points to diverse learners. Scaffolding, as well as other methods of differentiation is used to support diverse learners, including Special Education and ENL students to explain and justify their thinking. The dedicated use of Parent Engagement Time allows for information to be dispersed to parents by all staff members. The parent coordinator, in order to inform the community, will receive professional development during the fall and spring term by the Division of Family Engagement with more in-depth training provided by the District Family Advocate. Translation services will be used to provide the information to parents in the home language. Monthly progress reports, end of year reports and teacher surveys will be conducted and disseminated to parents to inform them of student growth and progress. N/A SWD, ENL Population Sep 2018-June 2019 Gr K-5 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Cluster Teachers, AIS Staff, ENL Teachers, Administration Gr K-5 Sep 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Cluster Teachers, AIS Staff, ENL Teachers, Administration 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The dedicated use of Parent Engagement Time allows for information to be dispersed to parents by all staff members. Staff members within each professional learning cohort will share specific topics with parents using student work and curriculum materials. The parent coordinator, in order to inform the community, will receive professional development during the fall and spring term by the Division of Family Engagement with more in-depth training provided by the District Family Advocate. Translation services will be used to provide the information to parents in the home language. Monthly progress reports, end of year reports and teacher surveys will be conducted and disseminated to parents to inform them of student growth and progress. Sep 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Cluster Teachers, AIS Staff, ENL Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administration Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School programs are aligned to ensure that all grades have a common prep time to meet and allow for flexibility in intervisitation. Google Drive will be used to conduct teacher surveys. To facilitate inter school visitations substitute teachers would be hired. Our school continuously monitors programs, actions and strategies described in the above section to ensure that they meet the intent and purpose of the Federal and State programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of our eligible students are met. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, teachers will have chosen a minimum of one professional learning goal. The administration will have created four professional learning cohorts based on the teacher's goal(s) that will allow them the opportunity of intervisitation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Reflection sheets/attendance sheets 5  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS The 2017-18 School Quality Guide indicated that 100% of teachers said that the principal makes clear to the staff her expectations for meeting instructional goals and that the principal communicates a clear vision to the school. 2017-2018 Principal Performance Observation (PPO) stated: The principal continues to maintain a positive school culture. There is a culture of mutual respect among and between students, staff, parents and administration. As we visited classrooms, it was clear that teachers and students felt comfortable as you walked into classrooms, indicating that this is a usual practice. PRIORITY NEEDS  2017-2018 Principal Performance Observation (PPO) stated: The areas that you need to strengthen include Lowest Third Citywide, particularly Black and Hispanic males, which are the sub-groups where you are not on track to make Annual Yearly Progress based on the NYS Report Card scheduled to be released later this school year (based on 2016-17 NYS assessment results).  Establish school-wide expectations for setting long- and short-term goals for students; provide PD to support  teacher implementation of the goal setting process, and monitor implementation Inventory resources; and provide texts and materials that are leveled, challenging, and engaging for all groups of students  Provide PD to support teachers’ use of both formative and summative assessments to group students, adjust instructional plans to provide different points of entry as indicated, and to provide constructive and instructive feedback to students Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers in grades K-5 will use a progress monitoring program 3X annually in reading and mathematics as a diagnostic tool to pinpoint student needs as evidenced by administrative reports. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Cluster Teachers, ENL Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administration -Use of the i-Ready Program as a Response to Intervention (RTI) tool that will identify students who are struggling and then provide the interventions necessary. Gr K-5 -Grade level teams meet to look at common assessments and conduct an item analysis using the i-Ready reports to identify instructional gaps and provide clear, concise, and immediate next steps in order to increase student gains. - Ongoing teacher analysis of assessment results to determine exactly where to focus their instructional time. -To support Common Core success and blended learning, reports drive to student instruction and teacher-led instruction at point-of-use and track student progress toward Common Core State Standards/Next Generation. -The School Implementation Team (SIT) team analyzes and discusses students’ academic and social/emotional needs based on Strengths and Struggles evaluative referral form. -The Professional learning committee in partnership with the United Federation of Teachers (UFT) meets to discuss professional development for teachers and paraprofessionals. highlighting the needs of our SWD and ELL populations. Sep 2018-June 2019 8  In order to meet the needs of diverse learners, teachers work collaboratively across all grades during common preps. This time provides them with the planning that is needed to develop methods and locate materials to meet the learning needs of students by providing multiple points of access for Special Needs and ENLs. Teachers model, incorporate small group learning, facilitate discussions, and plan effective learning sequences to provide access points to diverse learners. Scaffolding, as well as other methods of differentiation is used to support diverse learners, including Special Education and ENL students to explain and justify their thinking. The dedicated use of Parent Engagement Time allows for information to be dispersed to parents by all staff members. Translation services will be used to provide the information to parents in the home language. Monthly progress reports, end of year reports and teacher surveys will be conducted and disseminated to parents to inform them of student growth and progress. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Gr K-5 Sep 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Cluster Teachers, ENL Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administration Gr K-5 Sep 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Cluster Teachers, AIS Staff, ENL Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The dedicated use of Parent Engagement Time allows for information to be dispersed to parents by all staff members. Parents are provided with a detailed and easy-to-read analysis of the i-Ready report showing every student’s proficiency levels. Reports detail which skills their child has mastered and those skills to prioritize next for instruction, thereby supporting reading and math success for every student. Translation services will be used to provide the information to parents in the home language. Sep 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Cluster Teachers, AIS Staff, ENL Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administration Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School leaders communicate high expectations for teaching and learning through weekly professional development sessions, weekly emailed newsletters, and professional learning events. All staff members receive ongoing professional development from school-based staff, including school leaders and teacher leaders, who support them in meeting all expectations. Professional learning will focus on topics such as differentiated instruction within the classroom and engaging all students in learning. Teachers meet to analyze data and form instructional groups based 9  on relevant, timely data. With the use of i-Ready teachers will see which students need intervention, the key areas to target for each student, and how to group students for instruction.These instructional groups will be present in teachers’ lessons within reading, writing and math and will indicate appropriate tasks or activities for each group. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, data from the first and second i-Ready Diagnostic Intervention Reports will be analyzed to determine which students will continue online instruction and remediation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. i Ready Class and Student Reports Attached is the updated data which compares the Fall Diagnostic Report to the Winter Diagnostic Report. Fall to Winter Reading Diagnostic Green (On or Above Grade Level) Yellow (One Grade Level Below) Whole School Fall Whole School Winter Change 21% 35% + 14% Kindergarten Fall Kindergarten Winter Change First Grade Fall First Grade Winter Change Second Grade Fall Second Grade Winter Change Third Grade Fall Third Grade Winter Change Fourth Grade Fall Fourth Grade Winter Change Fifth Grade Fall Fifth Grade WInter Change 26% 37% +11% 5% 25% +20% 19% 46% +27% 35% 37% +2% 14% 32% +18% 26% 34% +8% 51% 43% -8% 74% 63% -11% 79% 67% -12% 49% 42% -7% 25% 32% +7% 52% 34% -18% 31% 26% -5% Red (Two or more grade levels below) 28% 22% -6% 0% 0% 0% 16% 9% -7% 32% 13% -19% 40% 31% -9% 34% 34% 0% 43% 40% -3% Comments 1 student absent: Izaan 1 student absent: Diego 0  Analysis of comparison (Fall to Winter iReady Reading Diagnostic): When comparing the Fall and Winter i-Ready Reading Diagnostic tests, schoolwide data shows that there was a 14% increase in the number of students performing in Tier 1 (meeting or above grade level), an 8% decrease in the numbers of students performing in Tier 2 (one grade level below) and a 6% decrease in the number of students performing in Tier 3 (two or more grade levels below). Students across each grade level showed overall improvement on the Reading Diagnostic assessment. The most significant changes occurred in grades 1 and 2 where there was a 20% and 27% increase in the number of students performing at grade level, respectively. Each grade also showed a drop in the number of students performing two or more levels below grade level. Grade 2 had the most significant drop at 19%. Each grade level showed an increase in the percentage of students scoring at or above grade level. Each grade level also showed a decrease in the percentage of students scoring one or more below grade levels below. Grades 3 and 5 showed the least amount of growth within Tier 1 (students on or above grade level) with 3% and 8%, respectively. Kindergarten students were reported as rushing and presented with red or yellow flags on the class reports. Students were using iPads to ensure the most child friendly administration possible, however, 26 out of 41 students were issued a rush flag. The i-Ready results may not accurately reflect our kindergarten students’ Fall to Winter Reading Diagnostic Green (On or Above Grade Level) Yellow (One Grade Level Below) K-207 FALL K-207 Winter Change K-217 Fall K-217 Winter Change 1-303 Fall 1-303 Winter Change 1-305 Fall 1-305 Winter Change 2-313 Fall 2-313 Winter Change 2-307 Fall 2-307 WInter Change K/1-301 Fall K/1-301 Winter Change reading abilities. 19% 43% +24% 20% 35% +15% 11% 32% +21% 0% 18% +18% 35% 83% +48% 4% 13% +9% 31% 15% -15% 76% 52% -24% 70% 65% -15% 71% 54% -17% 89% 79% -10% 61% 17% -44% 39% 70% +31% 46% 46% 0% Red (Two or more grade levels below) 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 14% 11% -3% 11% 0% -11% 0% 0% 0% 52% 13% -39% 23% 23% 0% Comments 1 student discharged 1 student discharged (1%) 1 new student 2 discharged 1  Fall to Winter Reading Diagnostic Green (On or Above Grade Level) Yellow (One Grade Level Below) 3-315 FALL 3-315 Winter Change 3-317 Fall 3-317 Winter Change 4-402 Fall 4-402 Winter Change 4-407 Fall 4-407 Winter Change 5-401 Fall 5-401 Winter Change 5-417 Fall 5-417 WInter Change 2/3/4-415 Fall 2/3/4-415 Winter Change ⅘-407 Fall ⅘-407 Winter Change 57% 64% +7% 17% 17% 0% 0% 8% +8% 30% 59% +29% 4% 12% +8% 62% 71% +9% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 11% 18% +7% 41% 52% +11% 52% 48% -4% 56% 22% -34% 35% 31% -4% 38% 29% -9% 0% 0% 0% 18% 9% -9% Red (Two or more grade levels below) 29% 18% -11% 38% 31% -7% 44% 44% 0% 15% 7% -8% 62% 58% -4% 0% 0% 0% 100% 100% 0% 82% 82% 0% Fall to Winter Reading Diagnostic Green (On or Above Grade Level) Yellow (One Grade Level Below) ELLs Fall ELLs Winter Change SWD Overall Fall SWD Overall Winter Change SWD ICT Fall SWD ICT Winter Change SWD Self-contained Fall SWD Self-contained Winter Change 6.9% 6.5% -.4% 4% 10.7% +6.7% 1.8% 12.5% +10.7% 12.5% 6.25% -6.25% 37.9% 51.6% +13.7% 38% 39.3% +1.3% 44.6% 44.7% +.1% 25% 21.9% +3.1% Red (Two or more grade levels below) 55% 42% -13% 58% 50% -8% 53.6% 43% -10.6% 62.5% 71.9% +9.4% Comments 1 absent, 2 discharged 1 absent Comments Absent: Brianna 2  Analysis of subgroups: The number of ELL students performing two or more grade levels below decreased by 13% as the amount of students performing one grade level below increased by 13%. So there is steady improvement. Overall, the students with disabilities also showed a decrease in students performing two or more grade levels below grade level (-8%) and an increase of students performing in at or above grade level (+6.7%). However, the students with disabilities in the self-contained classes have shown a decrease in students performing at or above grade level and an increase in the number of students performing one or more grade levels below grade level. Based on the i-Ready results, these students seem to be struggling and falling behind further. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS As per our 2017-18 School Quality Guide findings 100% of parents stated they feel respected by their child's teacher. PRIORITY NEEDS As per our 2017-18 School Quality Guide findings only 66% of families stated they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. The low turnout during Parent Engagement along with low attendance rates at Professional Development (PD's) indicate the need for expansion of school-family partnerships. Parents on the SLT committee have requested for the school to align resources to implement various after school programs. The ELL and SWD subgroups can experience the enhancement of social awareness through these extra curricular activities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P.S. 151 staff will increase the partnerships with parents, community members, local politicians and local organizations to harness the resources available to create a before and/or after school program for at least twenty five percent (25%) of students. 4  5 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PK – 5 students and families Sep 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Cluster Teachers, AIS Staff, ENL Teachers, Parent Coordinator Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). -Community partnerships will be built with the local council member's office, 114th Precinct, and other local organizations to implement various opportunities for before and/or after school programs. -Survey parents for days/times of availability -Title III money will be budgeted to implement a morning and after school program for all ELLs. -Periodic meetings will be scheduled with stakeholders to sustain professional rapport, ensuring goals are current and shared beliefs are continuously cultivated. -All information that will inform families of school events and activities must be sent in at least two languages. This is to include parent letters, flyers, telephone calls, email, phone relays, and the school web site. -Parent workshops along with Parent Teacher conferences will provide encouragement to improve school and family partnership that will promote students' increased achievement. -All after school programs will be offered to all students within the building and will be tailored to meet the needs of all students. -ELL and SWD students will be a big part of these programs and will be instructed through various strategies, such as visuals scaffolds, vocabulary awareness, etc. 6  -Each program will have a special focus on social and emotional awareness to raise their self-confidence. In order to meet the needs of diverse learners, teachers are supported in their planning to develop methods and locate materials to meet the learning needs of students by providing multiple points of access for Special Needs and ENLs. Scaffolding, as well as other methods of differentiation is used to support diverse learners and their families, including Special Education and ENL students to explain and justify their thinking. The dedicated use of Parent Engagement Time allows for information to be dispersed to parents by all staff members. The parent coordinator and principal will collaborate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) and PA during monthly meetings to increase parent awareness of student and family activities. The Parent Coordinator will promote monthly events to parents by distributing a monthly event calendar, sending notices home with students, and with the implementation of the School Messenger , make recorded calls to families. Translation services will be used to provide the information to parents in the home language . N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement PK – 5 students and families Sep 2018-June 2019 PK – 5 students and families Sep 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Cluster Teachers, AIS Staff, ENL Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Parent Association, Administration Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coach, Cluster Teachers, AIS Staff, ENL Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Parent Association, Administration If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Woodside on the Move; Sunnyside After School; Alley Pond Environmental Center, Brighter Bites. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I SWP funds support curriculum development, professional learning and all student activities. Parent activities will be funded by 1% set aside of Title I SWP funds. Ongoing communication with parents will support the success and sustainability of these events. Our school continuously monitors programs, actions and strategies described in the above section to ensure that they meet the intent and purpose of the Federal and State programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of our eligible students are met. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7  By January 2019, 100% of documentation (phone logs and emails) will be reviewed and evaluated to ensure attempts were made to seek the resources needed to establish these programs. Attendance will be evaluated to determine if the number of students participating in a before or after school program increased by 10%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Budget/Before and or After school program attendance/parent meeting attendance/ volunteers in school programs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) New York State Education Department (NYSED) recommendations state that students who have a score below proficient (Level 3) on State assessments in ELA or Math have been required to receive AIS Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) RTI Plan After-school program for Title 1 students (supplemental for levels 1 & 2) Target Intervention Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Whole Class Core instruction (tier 1 RTI) Small group instruction (tier 2 RTI) Small group tutoring Individual instruction (tier3 RTI When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day After school During the school day During the school day Small group instruction Small group instruction Small group instruction (tier 2 RTI) Individualized instruction (tier 3 RTI) Mathematics NYSED recommendations state that students who have a score below proficient (Level 3) on State assessments in ELA or Math have been required to receive AIS Science NYSED recommendations state that students Utilize a multimodality /manipulative approach incorporating a UDL and multiple entry point approach to learning math through exploration Utilize a hands on approach to 9 Small group instruction During the school day  Social Studies who have a score below proficient (Level 3) on State assessments in ELA or Math have been required to receive AIS NYSED recommendations state that students who have a score below proficient (Level 3) on State assessments in ELA or Math have been required to receive AIS At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) NYSED recommendations state that students who have a score below proficient (Level 3) on State assessments in ELA or Math have been required to receive AIS science exploration and discover through experiments Utilize New York City Core Curriculum (Grade 4), Journeys, differentiated support for Students with Disabilities and ELL students, document-based lessons/differentiated instruction using picture cues, graphs, diagrams and maps as needed throughout curriculum The Guidance Counselor (with Small group instruction During the school day One-to-one, small group During the school day parental consent) provides at-risk One-to-one, small group During the school day counseling for students who are One-to-one, small group During the school day One-to-one, small group During the school day One-to-one, small group During the school day having difficulties in the school or home environment, assists parents to find support agencies for their child when needed and provides peer intervention and conflict resolution. The School Psychologist (with 0  parental consent) provides at-risk counseling for students who are having difficulties in the school or home environment and provides support to classes in Grades 3-5 in the areas of socialization and conflict resolution. The Social Worker (with parental consent) provides at-risk counseling for students who are having difficulties in the school or home environment and provides support to classes in Grades 3-5 in the areas of socialization and conflict resolution. Our Speech therapists work with students identified by their classroom teachers as at-risk students. Clinic Plus from Western Queens Consultation, an outside organization, offers counseling services for students (with parental 1  consent) and their families at our school. 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Two students The McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor’s Regulation A-780 ensure that students residing in temporary living situations have access to the same public education and services that are available to permanently housed students. The Students in Temporary Housing (STH) unit within the Office of Safety and Youth Development (OSYD) is available to answer questions on the rights of students residing in temporary housing situations. In addition, STH Content Experts are available in each borough to provide technical assistance and to work directly with schools. At PS 151Q, to ensure that students have equal opportunity to succeed in school the following services will be provided: arrange transportation (yellow bus) assist students with immediate enrollment even without proper documentation assist with tutoring   provide Metro cards    provide related social-emotional services  provide school supplies  update health records and immunization (asthma questionnaire, vision, hearing)    provide summer programs  provide Dispute Resolution assist students with free lunch assist with special education programs (referrals, placement, transfers, etc.) Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. P.S. 151 follows NYCDOE policies for recruitment, retention, assignments and support including high quality professional development that ensures the staff is highly qualified. In order to optimize new educator supply, recruitment is done from preparation programs whose educators consistently achieve better student outcomes. Additionally, a hiring committee using a teacher and principal evaluation system is in place that link employment decisions to the effectiveness of educators available for hiring. In order to implement all school programs, P.S.151 employs certified teachers who are willing to learn new ideas and strategies. New strategies and programs are researched and approved by the instructional team. When new programs are implemented by the staff, professional development is provided so that teachers can successfully implement these programs and strategies into their classrooms. Multiple educator effectiveness measures (observations, student growth) are used to identify teachers who consistently demonstrate high levels of effectiveness that can serve as models and mentors for their peers. Management measures are used to make strategic staffing decisions that include educator effectiveness data, student growth and achievement, teacher turnover rates, effectiveness-based retention of teachers, first year teacher status, certification status, attendance data, experience, credentials, and highly qualified teacher status. Administrators, instructional coordinators, and mentors work with teachers so that they become proficient in using the Houghton-Mifflin JOURNEYS Reading Program which allows students to reach high standards in all English Language Arts areas. All teachers participate in staff development opportunities so they will be trained in aligning instruction to the Common Core Standards. Outside consultants are invited into the school to provide teachers with new strategies and programs to address students’ learning needs. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers will have opportunities to grow as professionals. Through this work they will: ● develop skills in describing and analyzing student learning using evidence and example ● identify learning gaps among the student population and create plans of action to address student learning needs 5  ● self-assess and identify professional learning required to become more effective ● develop strong questioning techniques and skill in asking questions in multiple ways to provide multiple pathways for students to engage in rigorous academic tasks ● develop skill and understanding in the principles of universal design ● develop skills in improving professional practice around teacher effectiveness related to the practice of designing coherent instruction Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). During Open House with the community members and families, the staff shares the school’s approach to meeting the needs of all students and the school’s goals for students and staff. Family members of older elementary school students are invited to participate with the goal of providing insight into how to prepare the children for school. The Pre-Kindergarten family worker and the parent coordinator will make direct contact with families by phone to share school contact information. The school supplies Kindergarten teachers with class lists in June so they can contact the families of their incoming students. The use of the Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale – Revised Edition (ECERS-R) ensures regulation compliance and high quality early childhood education. During inquiry time and grade conferences, the Pre-K teachers along with the Administration and Instructional Coach revised and updated a Pre-K progress report to ensure alignment with CCLS, which is shared with the parents. The final report is provided to the Kindergarten teacher. Pre-K students are provided with early intervention services, as needed, through speech services, occupational therapy services, physical therapy sessions and Special Education Itinerant Teachers. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 6  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● A MoSL committee was selected in June 2018, which then in September 2018, decides on the state and local measures for Advance. ● After teacher teams on each grade met, they collectively decided to use the unit tests from Journeys and Go Math. ● Additionally, based on meetings with the Instructional Coach, each grade also agreed upon continuing with TCRWP. During grade conferences with the Administration and the Pedagogical Leadership Team, there is ongoing professional development that will enable the teachers to create various methods to regularly and collaboratively look for evidence of growth and gaps in student work and teacher practice in order to make adjustments. This will ensure that teacher teams will regularly be able to: ● Make evidence-based adjustments to their units, lessons, and teaching practices based on assessment results ● Share successful instructional practices based on positive assessment results 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 198,363 82,869 12,366 0 2,385,895 X X X NA X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E 7  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 8  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S.151Q, Mary D. Carter School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. P.S.151Q, Mary D. Carter School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; 0  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; 1  ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 151Q, Mary D. Carter School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Meet State Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 2  ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 3  Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 4  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Analysis of NYS exams show that the English Language Learners (ELLs) population results in scores below grade level in ELA. Additionally, the assessments given throughout the year (TCRWP, i-Ready) also indicate the same results. The only availability for home language assessments are in Math and Science. The Math results in lower scoring due to the fact that considerable amounts of reading comprehension are required; despite the fact that it is in the students home language. The lack of knowledge of the academic language still continues to be a barrier to success for this population. However, Science results show scores that are approaching grade level due to the fact that a large portion of this particular assessment is performance - based. The ENL coordinator views and analyzes the results of the NYS exams along with interim ELL assessments with the administration. The data is used from these tests to refocus our instruction to better serve the needs of these students. These test results show that students need to become more proficient in reading and writing. We are addressing this issue by targeting these students in our extended day using varied instructional approaches based on their proficiency levels. Following an analysis of current systems, PS 151Q determined that it was necessary to bridge the achievement gap between Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and General Education students. Data used was: NYSESLAT to determine students’ ENL level (students who are SWDs and ELLs); TCRWP to monitor reading progress; and New York State (NYS) test results for ELA and Math. Students with disabilities are a population that needs focus to improve student learning. Analysis of this data revealed that the number of students with an Individualized Education Program (IEP), especially in self-contained classes, who performed at levels 1 and 2 on NYS exams in ELA and Math, scored far below outcomes for other student sub-groups. The Reading Wizards program is designed to support struggling 1st and 2nd grade readers. The program incorporates a multi-sensory learning environment using evidence based phonics intervention. The program is taught by two (one monolingual one bilingual) NYS licensed and American Speech-Language-Hearing Association certified Speech-Language Pathologists. Both have experience implementing effective strategies for reading instruction. Speech-Language Pathologists provide small group instruction targeting phonics skills such as: blending sounds to read, segmenting sounds to spell, and implementing reading rules and rule exceptions. Subgroups within the program are created based on baseline and progress monitoring data collected. A multisensory approach from the Lively Letters program paired with the hierarchical framework of the Recipe for Reading Program provides struggling readers with fun and effective means to become better readers. Activities include: using manipulatives to “play” with sounds, incorporating kinesthetic tasks (movement of mouth, hands), and drilling of direct instruction. The Reading Wizards program runs from 7:20-8:00 a.m. Monday-Thursday for the 2018-2019 school year. The allocation of funds will be specific to the support of personnel who will provide services to ELL students along with the acquisition of curricular materials, educational software, and technologies to be used in the program.The materials used are provided from Continental Press. Students will be provided with charts, graphic organizers, etc. to further their understanding of the content area. These materials are supplemental and distinct from those used 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information for daily instruction. Additionally, there will be general instruction supplies provided (paper, chart paper, markers, crayons and pencils). Grouping for Instruction: * Students will be grouped in levels of Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning thus targeting each group’s specific academic needs. Instruction will focus on literacy skills (reading, writing, phonics), and math skills (problem solving, computations, reading charts, analyzing graphs). All instruction will be done in English, using ENL methods and scaffolding strategies. All records (ex. program notifications, position postings, teacher requirements, student selection, applications, etc.) regarding the after school program, including attendance sheets are generated and stored by the program supervisor. To ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs the NYCDOE translation services are used to provide information in the home language. Additionally, bilingual staff is called upon for assistance. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Professional Development Program will be provided by the Queens North Field Support Center, Instructional Coach, and the ENL Coordinator. All presenters will have an agenda that is specific to the delivery of instruction and services to ELLs and approved by the administration. The agendas along with the attendance sheets are collected and filed in a PD binder which is located in the principal's office and available for perusal at any time. The PD's will focus on providing the classroom teachers with differentiated and scaffolding instructional strategies for ELLs. The integration of information provided at the various PD's will focus on how to prepare ENL's to meet and exceed the NYC Performance and Learning Standards. The PD's will positively impact the performance of ELLs progress by achieving higher scores on city and state tests. The targeted population will be the teachers who have ELL students in their classes and will occur on the following dates: Oct. 23, 2018; Nov. 19, 2018; Dec. 10, 2018; Jan. 14, 2019; Feb. 11, 2019; Mar. 11, 2019; May 13, 2019; Jun 3, 2019. Topics that will be addressed are: - Writing lesson plans based on the scaffolding and current ENL practices - Universal Design for Learning and Vocabulary - Strategies needed to prepare ENL'S for the NYSESLAT - Language Acquisition or Learning Disability - How to create lesson and unit plans reflect knowledge of ENL pedagogy, including native language support - How to plan activities that incorporates literacy strategies to support ENLs - How to design multiple entry points based upon ENLs' content and language proficiency in planning activities 8  Part C: Professional Development - How to create task and activities that allow students at all language acquisition levels to be cognitively challenged in content and language development Additional PD provided in house will include: - Promethean board training - Training for K-5 in the Journeys Literacy Program - Training in Go Math mathematics Program - Mathematical instructional strategies and lesson plan writing, to enhance student skills and performance on city and state tests - Understanding the needs of an ENL student Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent workshops will give the parents the opportunity to better assist in the education and learning of their children at home. Additional parent workshops will be conducted both during and after school. The duration of the workshops will be 1 hour. Below is the 2018 workshop schedule: Oct - 5, 26; Nov - 9; Dec - 7; Jan - 11, 18, 25; Mar 1, 8 Below is the 2019 workshop schedule: Jan - 10; Feb - 28; Mar - 13; Apr - 17; May 23 These workshops will cover topics such as: (Homework Help, Navigating the NYC School System, The Common Core Learning Standards - Student Impact, Making Healthy Nutritional Choices, Asthma Awareness, Brighter Bites, NYC Kids Rise, Department of Health (DOH), and ENL Parent Instruction). The purpose for these additional workshops are based on the results of a needs assessment survey that the parents filled out which voiced their priorities and concerns. These workshops will be held throughout the year. All parental activities are noted on the monthly school calendar. They will be provided by the Parent Coordinator, the Family Worker, Guidance counselor and the ENL teachers. Parents are notified about these activities through correspondence sent home in English and home languages. The NYCDOE translation services are used to provide this information in the home language. During the meetings, staff and parents are available to translate any information that is presented on the agenda. 9 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities All Parent Engagement presenters will have an agenda that is specific to the delivery of instruction and services to ELLs and approved by the administration. Agendas, attendance sheets, invitations, and any additional information sheets are collected and filed in a PD binder which is located in the principal's office and available for perusal at any time. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name Mary D. Carter Borough Queens School Number 151 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Samantha B. Maisonet Coach Lauren Mora ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Maysa Ismail Teacher/Subject Area Diane Costello/Library Teacher/Subject Area Sandra Rodriguez/AIS Related-Service Provider Maysa Ismail Superintendent Dr. Philip Composto Assistant Principal Anthony Bentivegna Coach School Counselor Vicki Fernandez Parent Elizabeth Lugo Parent Coordinator Naida Ryans Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Victoria Sena C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 6 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 6 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 365 1 Total number of ELLs 49 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.42%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Program TBE Lang. K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Since it is important to assess ELLs in literacy, our school uses several different methods in which to gather data in the early childhood grades. For our ELLs, we begin by using the NYSITELL with the Spanish LAB and the NYSESLAT to determine their ENL level. Once students are placed in a class the teacher then uses TCRWP to monitor reading progress. Students are reassessed ever six weeks using TCRWP system. This data shows that ELLs lag behind their English proficient peers in many aspects of early literacy. While ELL students can identify letters these students have more difficulties with letter sound relationships than native speakers. This includes trouble with beginning and ending sounds as well as rhyming words. We have just implemented the Fundatations in grades K-2 to promote phonics skills. Data shows the weak areas of our students that teachers need to concentrate on in their planning. Based on the data, we will provide extra support in reading comprehension through AIS. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2  In order to evaluate the success of of our ELL programs, we look at many different aspects of student learning. First the results of the NYSESLAT are taken into account. We have seen an increase in students scoring at the proficient level over the past several years. This indicates that we have made progress with our ELL students. However, most of these gains were made in the general education population. We still need to address our ELL-SWD population. We are addressing this by providing specific instruction during our after school program. We assess the progress made by the students on NYS tests in the upper grades and TCRWP assessments in the all grades. Following thess assessments, a plan to implement an AIS program with our ELLs is put in place. We also evaluate our success through the analysis of student data portfolios, student and teacher interviews and parental satisfaction. The success of our ESL program is evaluated regularly based on NYSESLAT scores, improvement and progress in proficiency level, as well as student scores in all state assessments and grades. The ELL Periodic Assessment has become a valuable tool to determine the progress of ELLs. All eligible ELLs take the ELL Periodic Assessment twice a year. Results are analyzed to determine current student strengths and weaknesses, which help teachers plan instruction and modify instruction to the individual needs of their students. This helps the students determine appropriate goal setting. The results are shared with our School Leadership Team, Instructional Coach, Access Language Coordinator, SIT members, classroom teachers, and related service providers. The analysis of the test results will illuminate any differences between student classroom performances and test scores. The results allow teachers to recognize students' test-taking skills and to prepare effectively for the NYS assessments. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to evaluate the success of of our ELL programs, we look at many different aspects of student learning. First the results of the NYSESLAT are taken into account. We have seen an increase in students scoring at the proficient level over the past several years. This indicates that we have made progress with our ELL students. However, most of these gains were made in the general education population. We still need to address our ELL-SWD population. We are addressing this by providing specific instruction during our after school program. We assess the progress made by the students on NYS tests in the upper grades and TCRWP assessments in the all grades. Following thess assessments, a plan to implement an AIS program with our ELLs is put in place. We also evaluate our success through the analysis of student data portfolios, student and teacher interviews and parental satisfaction. The success of our ESL program is evaluated regularly based on NYSESLAT scores, improvement and progress in proficiency level, as well as student scores in all state assessments and grades. The ELL Periodic Assessment has become a valuable tool to determine the progress of ELLs. All eligible ELLs take the ELL Periodic Assessment twice a year. Results are analyzed to determine current student strengths and weaknesses, which help teachers plan instruction and modify instruction to the individual needs of their students. This helps the students determine appropriate goal setting. The results are shared with our School Leadership Team, Instructional Coach, Access Language Coordinator, SIT members, classroom teachers, and related service providers. The analysis of the test results will illuminate any differences between student classroom performances and test scores. The results allow teachers to recognize students' test-taking skills and to prepare effectively for the NYS assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? In order to meet the needs of ENL students, once the summarize data is available, teachers work collaboratively across all grades during common preps to analyze the data. Additionally, this time provides them with the planning that is needed to develop methods to meet the individual needs of students. They identify the intervention materials to be used to meet the learning needs of students. Planning includes providing multiple points of access for ENL students. Teachers model, incorporate small group learning, facilitate discussions, and plan effective learning sequences to provide access points to ENL students. Scaffolding, as well as other methods of differentiation is used to support ENL students in order for them to explain and justify their thinking. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school determines whether students are benefiting from an instructional program within a reasonable time. This is done using the data such as: TCRWP, ELL Periodic Assessment, as well as classroom curriculum assessments. As data is collected, a more effective instructional program is put in place for students who are not benefiting from the initial program. A comparison is made to measure the efficacy of different forms of instruction and individualized instructional programs. This has reduced 3  inappropriate referrals. Tier II and Tier III RTI is provided. Tier II is a pull out homogeneous group and Tier III is comprised of one-to-one instruction. This instruction is targeted towards students' specific needs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Through data analysis of the NYSITELL with the Spanish LAB and the NYSESLAT, we have found the majority of our lower grade ELL student are either at the Emerging or Entering levels in their English language development. In kindergarten which is reflected by the NYSITELL, 33% of the ELLs are Entering, 40% are Intermediate and 27% are Expanding. In first grade, 15% are Entering, 46% Intermediate and 39% Expanding. In second grade 29% Entering, 43% Intermediate, 14% Expanding and 14 % Commanding. In third grade 0% Entering, 0% Intermediate, 89% Expanding and 11% Commanding. In fourth grade 20% of ELLS are Entering, 20% are Intermediate, 20% Expanding, and 40% Commanding. In fifth grade, 0% are Enteringing, 50% Intermediate, 25% Expanding and 25% Commanding. With further analysis of the modalities, it has been concluded that our ELL students need to work on reading and writing skills. Since it is critical to advance these students in reading and writing, we addressed these needs in several ways. In our lower grades, we use the reading series which promotes both reading and writing skills for ELL students. In the upper grades, the ELLs are our targeted students and receive supplemental instruction in reading and writing during the after school program. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers will meet once a month to analyze formative assessments result specifically related to reading and writing as evidenced by agendas and teacher attendance sheets. Furthermore teachers will participate in ongoing planning with the ENL/ESL teacher on ENL/ESL methodology for instruction, that will enable the teachers to create various methods to regularly and collaboratively look for evidence of growth and gaps in student work and teacher practice in order to make adjustments. This will ensure that teacher teams will regularly be able to: ● Make evidence-based adjustments to their units, lessons, and teaching practices based on assessment results ● Share successful instructional practices based on positive assessment results Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding English as a new language (ENL) programs provide instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. Students in freestanding ENL programs can come from many different language backgrounds, and English may be the only common language among the students. As per CR Part 154, there are 2 types of ENL: • Stand-alone ENL is instruction to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. A student may not receive stand-alone ENL in lieu of core content area instruction. • Integrated ENL is instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction. It is delivered by a dually certified teacher (ENL and a content area) or co-teaching by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies). Both methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status must receive a minimum number of units of integrated ENL. Students are grouped heterogeneously. The self-contained program has a teacher who has dual certifications in ENL 4  and common branches. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Self-contained – this model is implemented in grades K - 5. The teachers are certified in ENL/ESL and instruct the class in English in all subject areas. The workshop model (whole-small-whole) is the approach used as the primary instructional methodology. The teachers use ENL/ESL and scaffolding strategies to further enhance student’s understanding. Visuals, such as word webs, word walls, graphs, graphic organizers, and charts are used to ensure academic success for ELL students. The required leveled libraries expose the ELL students to a variety of genres. The students are able to choose reading material on a level that he/she is comfortable with and which can then increase in difficulty. During the reading block, all ELL students are given 50 minutes of ENL/ESL instruction. In addition, intermediate students are given 50 minutes of ENL/ESL instruction during Inquiry Time. Also, the beginners are pulled out for 50 minutes of ESL with the ESL push-in teacher. Libraries are equipped with books of different cultural backgrounds, such as Spanish, Bengali, Chinese, etc., to promote cross-cultural acceptance and aid students in their native language. All content area subjects are taught in English using ENL/ESL methodology. At this time we are an International Baccalaureate Candidate school and are using inquiry based learning for all content areas. Free-Standing ESL model- this model is implemented in grades K - 5 general education. The SWD students are serviced by the pull-out model. P.S. 151Q abides by the language allocation policy of New York State Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154. These regulations require the following time allotments: Beginner / Entering 360 180 180 integrated ENL/ELA 0 Low Intermediate / Emerging 360 90 180 integrated ENL/ELA 90 Intermediate / Transitioning 180 0 90 integrated ENL/ELA 90 Advanced / Expanding 180 0 180 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area 0 Proficient / Commanding** 90 0 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area 0 The ESL instructional models that are implemented at P.S. 151Q are: self-contained ESL classes and a Free-Standing ESL program using the push-in/pull-out models. A certified ENL/ESL teacher pushes in or pulls out students during reading and writing periods. ENL/ESL instruction, using language rich instruction geared to meet the ENL/ESL and ELA performance standards, is provided. This teacher works with classroom teachers using the Journey's Literacy Program. In collaboration with the classroom teacher, the push-in/pull-out teacher works towards ensuring proper understanding by the ELLs. In order to maximize English acquisition for ELL students, the ENL/ESL push-in/pull-out teacher and classroom teachers utilize common planning to align instruction. It is our goal that ELL students will become proficient by the end of the third year of services and meet the required score necessary on the NYSESLAT. All instruction is done in English. To ensure academic success, scaffolding strategies are utilized through the use of word walls, word webs, graphs, diagrams, etc. These students receive content area instruction in English, given by their classroom teacher. These teachers participate in ongoing planning with the ENL/ESL teacher on ENL/ESL methodology for instruction. . At this time, we are an International Baccalaureate Candidate school and are using inquiry based learning for all content areas. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The Free-Standing model uses the Journey's literacy program along with scaffolding strategies in order to maximize English language acquisition. The common core based instructions are integrated into every unit and lesson; there is scaffolding and differentiation in every lesson as well. The most helpful aspect of all is the digital library that provides easy access to teachers, 5  which minimizes the amount of paperwork and preparation for the lessons. Journey’s provides intervention for struggling readers, which can be a great tool for “the three tiers of intervention model.” Also, the layout is easily organized for teachers to follow. As for our English Language Learners, it provides them with the opportunity for explicit instructions in the major components in reading, phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension. The Journey’s curriculum is aligned to the state standards, and because of that, it is also aligned to the state assessments, which will eliminate the misconception that teachers must “teach to the test.” All instruction is done in English. Bilingual dictionaries are in classrooms as well as a buddy system. The Journeys program includes: a. Newcomer Teacher's Guide with modified lessons b. English Language Learner's Teacher's Handbook which assist teachers in setting up an ELL friendly classroom and modifying assessments c. Leveled texts for ELLs d. Language support cards e. ELL strategies highlighted within daily lessons Classroom teachers have access to students' edition and level text books in the Spanish language. Furthermore, the school library is equipped with books in different languages. The classroom environment for the programs (self-contained and Free-Standing) is print rich and reflects evidence of rigorous instruction that highlights students’ current work. This work is aligned to the New York State ENL/ESL Learning Standards. The following is evident: a. Flow of the day b. A technology center c. A listening center equipped with cassette/CD players, earphones, audio cassettes, CDs, books in bags, and read along books d. Leveled classroom libraries e. Word walls The ESL teacher pulls-out during reading, writing and math. In teaching our ELLs our focus is to include information about the student's strengths as well as areas of needs. The following checklist was created to help confirm that ELLs' learning opportunities are meeting ELLs learning needs: . Learning environment reflects the sociocultural process of language and content learning. . Learning experiences connect to relevant issues in ELLs’ lives. . Learning experiences connect to ELLs’ personal, cultural, language, and world experiences. . ELLs are provided with opportunities to work in pairs and small groups. . ELLs are provided with opportunities to demonstrate their understanding in a variety of ways, including their native language, regardless of the type of program they are in (i.e., transitional bilingual education, dual language, or ESL). . Group work activities engage ELLs in multiple opportunities to apply the language of content. . Learning environment reflects the developmental process of language and content learning. . Whole class activities reflect the specific English proficiency levels of ELLs in this classroom. . The paired and small group activities reflect the specific English proficiency levels of ELLs in this classroom. . Homework assignments match ELLs’ current levels of English proficiency and provide additional practice opportunities for what occurred during class. . The overarching as well as day’s content and language objectives are visibly displayed in clear, simple, student-friendly language. ELLs’ understanding is routinely checked. . Key terms, words, idioms, and phrases that ELLs need to learn have been taught and are clearly displayed. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Only the State Mathematics and Science tests are given in their native language as well as the LAB- R in Spanish. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing 6  d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status In our self-contained and free standing ENL/ESL program all content area subjects are taught in English using ESL methodology. Teachers use visuals, scaffolding, word webs, graphs, diagrams, etc. In order to differentiate our instruction, based on the subgroups of our ELL population, we have the following plan of action in place: a. SIFE - These are ELLs who have attended schools in the United States for less than twelve months and who, upon initial enrollment in such schools are two or more years below grade level in literacy in their home language and/or two or more years below grade level in mathematics due to inconsistent or interrupted schooling prior to arrival in the United States. Once a SIFE student is performing at or above the transitioning/intermediate level on the annual English language proficiency assessment, the student’s status as a Student with Inconsistent/Interrupted Formal Education is removed, even though the student may continue to be identified as an English language learner. We have no SIFE students. Our plan for any SIFE student entering our school with interrupted , little or no formal schooling in their first language, is as follows: evaluate them when they arrive and place them in the age appropriate grade. In subjects for which they are lacking grade appropriate skills, differentiated instruction will be conducted in an appropriate grade classroom. These students will also attend an extended day program . They will work in small groups to develop skills, which will advance them up to grade level. b. Newcomers (0-3 years): These are ELLs identified under CR Part 154 who have received English as a new language instruction, as a component of their bilingual education or freestanding English as a new language program, for a total of zero (0) to three (3) continuously enrolled school years in the United States. There is often a misconception that newcomer ELLs are only those who arrived very recently and exhibit little or no knowledge of English. While newly arrived ELLs are represented among the group of newcomer ELLs, many others are US-born and are at the emerging, transitioning, or higher levels. These students receive 360 minutes per week of ENL/ESL instruction until they become advanced/Expanding ELLS. When they reach the advancedExpanding level, they receive 180 minutes integrated ENL/ESL or other content area per week of ELA instruction. Either the certified push-in teacher or the ESL certified classroom teacher delivers this service during the school day in addition to the regular academic curriculum. c. 4 – 6 Year ELLs (Developing): These are ELLs identified under CR Part 154 who have received English as a new language instruction, as a component of their bilingual education or freestanding English as a new language program, for a total of four (4) to six (6) continuously enrolled school years in the United States. The students who are still beginner/intermediate, as determined by the NYSEASLAT, receive 360 minutes per week of ESL instruction until they become advanced ELLS. When they reach the advanced/Expanding level, they receive 180 minutes per week of integrated ENL/ESL instruction or other content area. Either the certified push-in teacher or the ESL certified classroom teacher delivers this service during the school day in addition to the regular academic curriculum. In addition, these students are included in our after school program where specific ELA skills are targeted in order to help them pass the NYSESLAT and achieve English proficiency. d. Long-Term ELLs (6+ years): These are ELLs identified under CR Part 154 who have received English as a new language instruction, as a component of their bilingual education or freestanding English as a new language program, for seven (7) or more continuously enrolled school years in the United States. As a Pre-Kindergarten – fifth grade school, it is highly unlikely that we would have any ELL students in this category. However, our plan for these students, besides the mandated ESL services, would include the addition of intensive work in ELA with the SETSS teacher and a possible evaluation for IEP services. As of this time, the only students in this situation have IEPs. We are using their IEP to provide appropriate instruction. e. Former ELL's: These are students who had been identified as English language learners and subsequently exited from ELL status. For at least two years following the school year in which a student is exited from ELL status, former ELLs receive at least one half of one unit of study of English as a new language (90 minutes per week) and are eligible for certain specified testing accommodations. Testing accommodations for ELL students on the NYS ELA and content-area assessments include the following: • Time extension (all exams): Schools may extend the test time for ELL students on NYS ELA and content-area assessments and on Regents examinations. Principals may use any reasonable extensions, such as "time and a half" (the required testing time plus half that amount), in accordance with their best judgment about the needs of the ELL students. Principals should consult with the student's classroom teacher in making these determinations. However, there are no time limits.   • Separate location (all exams): Schools are encouraged to provide optimal testing environments and facilities for ELL students. NYS assessments may be administered to ELLs individually or in small groups in a separate location.   • Third reading of listening selection (English Language Arts exams only): Proctors may read the listening passage three times to ELLs on grades 3-8 English Language Arts assessments and on the Regents Comprehensive Examination in English.   7  • Bilingual dictionaries and/or glossaries: ELLs may use bilingual glossaries when taking State examinations in all subjects except languages other than English exams (LOTE). The bilingual dictionaries and glossaries may provide only direct one-to-one translations of words. Bilingual dictionaries and/or glossaries that provide definitions or explanations are not permitted. Bilingual glossaries in the content areas are available for downloading.   • Simultaneous use of English and alternative language editions are not allowed for English Language Arts examinations. For state examinations for which SED provides written translations, ELLs may use both English and an alternative language edition of the test simultaneously. However, they should be instructed to record all of their responses in only one language. The alternative language edition used by the student should be so indicated on the student's answer sheet.   • Oral translations for low incidence languages are not allowed for English Language Arts examinations. Schools may provide ELL students with an oral translation of a state examination when there is no translated edition provided by SED. All translations must be oral, direct translations of the English editions. Written translations are not allowed. No clarifications or explanations may be provided. Translators should receive copies of the English edition of the tests one hour prior to administration.   • Writing responses in the home language are not allowed for English Language Arts examinations. ELL students making use of alternative language editions or of oral translations of state examinations may write their responses to the open-ended question in their home languages. Scoring the tests is the responsibility of the school.   6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL with Special Needs: Our ELLs with Special Needs are serviced as per their IEP's and the state-mandated units on ENL/ESL instruction. The following strategies are suggested to enhance the accessibility of course instruction, materials, and activities. They are general strategies designed to support individualized reasonable accommodations for which a student is eligible. . Provide handouts and visual aids. . When appropriate, team a reader with a non-reading student during in-class assignments. . Use more than one way to demonstrate or explain information. . Break information into small steps when teaching many new tasks in one lesson (state objectives, review previous lesson, summarize periodically). . Allow time for clarification of directions and essential information. . Provide study guides or review sheets for exams. . Provide alternative ways for the students to do tasks, such as dictations or oral presentations. Provide assistance with proofreading written work. . Stress organization and ideas rather than mechanics when grading in-class writing assignments. Allow the use of spell-check and grammar-assisted devices. . Allow the student the same anonymity as other students (i.e., avoid pointing out the student or the alternative arrangements to the rest of the class). All of our Special Needs/ENL students are serviced by an ENL/ESL certified teacher, who pushes in/pulls out to support these students using ENL/ESL methodology. Journey's is used for reading in all our Special Education classrooms including those with ELLs. Beginner/intermediate students receive 360 minutes per week of ESL instruction, while advanced students receive 180 minutes of ESL and 180 minutes of ELA instruction per week. Students whose IEPs require bilingual instruction are provided an alternate placement paraprofessional (who speaks the student's native language) and receives ENL/ESL services as noted above. Our ELL-SWD are serviced by using the pull-out model using the Journey's guided reading program. Our ELLs with special needs (depending on their IEPs) are assigned paraprofessionals and have the use of assistive technology available. Paraprofessionals assist the teachers to individualize instruction and help students to learn successfully at their own pace. Those with IEPs receive all the necessary services and accomodations that the IEP dictates. P.S. 151 uses a content and general education curriculum that is Common Core Learning Standards based and adapted to meet the diverse needs of our students. The ELL and classroom teachers work collaboratively to provide the least restrictive environment. Team teaching, as well as the pull out model, is carefully integrated in order to provide accurate service. The use of smaller classes with adapted content materials in a blended model has also been implemented. Our ELLs students are supported academically by the use of 8  technology. Classes are equipped with portable laptops and ipads. In addition, students have daily access to the computer lab in school. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ELL-SWDs are included in all school activities. They use the same curricular as all other students. They use Journey's for literacy, Go Math for math and the IB inquiry for all other content areas. Teachers who work with these students are trained to evaluate their progress and differentiate instruction as needed. Students are buddied up with advanced learners in the classroom. All classes are heterogeneously grouped. Before recommending special education services, a school’s IEP team first consider the full range of special education supplementary aids and services a student can receive in a general education classroom. Supplementary aids and services provide the support to enable students with disabilities to be educated within a general education class alongside to the maximum extent appropriate. Supplementary aids and services include services provided by various special education providers as well as other materials, devices, laptops, ipads, and instructional adaptations. Furthermore, SETSS program is used to maximize time spent with non-disabled peers. •Direct SETSS services in general education class •Direct SETSS services in a separate location •Indirect SETSS services through collaboration of general education and special education teachers A referral to special education can be made by a parent at anytime. A Planning and Placement Team (PPT/SIT) meeting must be held upon a parent’s referral for a special education evaluation. There is no time restriction for staff referring an ELL for evaluation when: . An early intervention process RTI/AIS has been followed within a systematic framework such as Scientifically Researched-Based Intervention . . Interventions, instructional strategies, and program options implemented have proven unsuccessful. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Using the NYS ELA and Math scores, NYSESLAT, classroom data (conference notes and unit assessments), we target our ELL students by supporting learning in Math, Science, Social Studies as well as ELA. The ENL/ESL teacher works collaboratively with the classroom teachers to develop lessons that are appropriately geared towards ELLs. We break tasks up into smaller steps, with level-appropriate language. For math, we are using Go Math, in Science and Social Studies we are using the International Baccalaureate (IB) Inquiry Program. Academic Intervention services (AIS) services are provided in ELA as per the scale score requirements on the NYS ELA assessment. For ELA, our targeted students receive focused development with an AIS teacher. All intervention services are provided in English only. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Across the grades we have been using Journey's Literacy Program and applying the ELL scaffolding strategies suggested in the ENL/ESL hand book. The school will be implementing Journey’s common core Reading Curriculum for K through 5th grade. The highlight points in this curriculum are the remarkable vocabulary instructions that help build better readers and writers and help with reading comprehension. Vocabulary is essential to reading development and is emphasized in all grades in the Common Core Standards. The common core based instructions are integrated into every unit and lesson; there are scaffolding and differentiation in every lesson as well. The most helpful aspect of all is the digital library that provides easy access to teachers, which minimizes the amount of paper work and preparation for the lessons. Journey’s provides intervention for struggling readers, which can be a great tool for “the three tiers of intervention model.” Also, the layout is easily organized for teachers to follow. Phonemic awareness is implementing throughout the program, which includes decoding which provides our students with the ability to isolate individual sounds in spoken words so they can better connect these sounds with specific letters. Phonemic awareness instruction is proven to effectively help students in reading and spelling skills at different grade levels. It is also present as a vital piece in teaching our ENL/ESL students. Journey’s scope and sequence have effective instructional approaches such as predictable routines, whole-group and small group instruction, engagement and motivation, collaborative learning, graphic organizers, scaffolding, and varied forms of communication. Ideas are presented visually to support students’ connections. Scaffolding exists to help students solidify what 9  they know in order to build on it. In 1st grade, there are a wide variety of reading books that engage readers especially in this age group with interesting topics. There is Core readers, Decodable readers, leveled readers, big books, and trade books as well. This curriculum map meets the students’ needs through differentiation and strategic intervention. It addresses the needs of struggling students as well as advanced students. Scaffolding for struggling readers helps them practice different strategies and the advanced learners ensure their progress. Differentiated instructions for these students include increased pacing, independent practice, and extended lessons to challenge their curiosity. As for our English Language Learners, it provides them with the opportunity for explicit instructions in the major components in reading, phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension. There are various components in the program for supporting ELL students such as language support cards, leveled readers, write-in readers, reading intervention tapes, and week-in glance. All of the components build background knowledge and promote oral language. Finally, this curriculum is designed to support teachers and students in various aspects. Teachers have weekly planners, which provide daily Common Core Standards for each lesson. As for students, the instructional content offers great opportunities to learn and master the Common Core Standards. We will not be discontinuing any programs this year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The discontinued programs are Literacy by Design and On our Way To English for the ELL classrooms. These programs were not aligned with the CCSS. As a committee we decided that without alignment to the CCSS, students face several challenges. First and foremost, they are not prepared for the next grade level because they did not gain the skills that the next grade teacher expects them to master. Second, we will collect and analyze the school assessment data (formative and summative) to find out how well the current curriculum is affecting student achievement. Then the decision will be made on whether or not adjustments should take place so that students achieve at higher levels and are better prepared for middle and high school. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All of our ELL students are included in all school activities and programs. Many of our ELLs participate in our after school program, which concentrates on NYS test preparation and summer academies funded by the NYC DOE. The goal of these program is to make sure all of our students including ELLs are meeting state standards. There is no difference in academic expectations for our ELLs. Academically rigorous work is expected from all of our students. Visuals and hands-on materials are used to support all students along with differentiated instruction. At P.S. 151, technology is used in every classroom. Teachers use SMART Boards to present mini-lessons and to research interesting topics. Laptops are available for each classroom. A NYS certified Computer Specialist, as well as trained classroom teachers, assist students with media skills. A plethora of computer resource programs are available. Our ENL/ESL resource center is equipped with a LeapPad Library, a Leapster Portable Technology Center, and a LeapTrack Assessment and Instruction System, which is accessible to teachers and students as needed. Our state of the art school science lab is well equipped with the latest technological equipment. ELLs have access to the school library which has English and native language literature as well as graphic novels of varying reading levels. Teacher generated materials allow for further individualized instruction. ELL's are offered after-school clubs such as chess, robotics, dance, music and chorus in the spring. All our ELLs are invited to particepate in all school activities, we encourage parental involvement in school. One way is by participating in parent-teacher conferences and functions, and receiving and responding to written communications from the teacher. Parents can also serve as school volunteers for the library or lunchroom, or as classroom aides. In one survey, almost all teachers reported talking with children's parents-- either in person, by phone, or on open school nights--and sending notices home. These methods, along with requests for parents to review and sign homework, were most frequently used to involve parents. ELL students are represented in all programs. Self-Contained ESL Classrooms: The principal assigns ELL students along with general education students to Self-Contained classrooms. ELL students are grouped together for their core subjects but have the opportunity to interact with other students in music, art, physical education, library and lunch. Lessons are planned according to students’ English language proficiency levels. We also use the push-in/pull-out ENL model for our ENL-SWD . 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Native language support is delivered to our Freestanding ENL/ESL program with materials such as dictionaries, novels, picture books, and visual aids. ELLs are encouraged to buddy up and interact with others who speak the same home language and can 0  assist and translate for them. Bilingual teachers, school aides, and other staff members also interact with students in their native language. Based on New York State testing guidelines, ELLs are given the opportunity to use a translated version of the NYS Math, Science, and Social Studies exams along with glossaries. Students who speak and read in a language that is not one of the translated languages provided by the state are given the opportunity to use a bilingual glossary published by the Department of Education. English language learners use laptops in the classrooms to reinforce vocabulary and concepts through pictures, graphics and video. They also benefit from being able to use technology to express themselves. Technology helps English language learners find a voice, easing the transition to a new language. To help students learn as much as possible and to demonstrate that knowledge,we equipped all classrooms with the interactive whiteboard. This technology is an excellent tool for presenting multimedia lessons and encouraging student participation. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language is supported in our classrooms through peer translation. New students are buddied-up with an English fluent student who is knowledgeable in the student’s native language. This type of peer support helps to acclimate the new student to our school. We ensure that resources such as classroom libraries and software used are appropriate for the age and grade level of our ELLs. All ENL/ESL teachers deliver instruction to ELLs in English. Content and language objectives are clearly written for the students and the students are aware of their individual benchmark goals. Teachers choose content concepts that are age appropriate keeping in mind the educational background level of the students. Teachers use supplementary materials such as graphs, models/manipulatives and visual aids, to ensure that content areas are taught at the levels of student proficiency. Teachers also plan meaningful activities that incorporate lesson concepts providing opportunities for listening, speaking reading and writing. Teachers identify various ways to assess our students’ progress using data such as, LAB-R, NYSESLAT, ELL Periodic Assessments, NYS ELA, and NYS Math to identify students’ preferred learning styles, strengths and weaknesses and individual learning needs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The students are placed in their age appropriate grade level in a free standing ENL/ESL class. The Free Standing Classrooms content areas are taught in English using ENL/ESL strategies. Students who are new to NYC puplic school are placed in an age appropriate grade level classes. The Advanced level students will receive 180 minutes of ENL/ESL instruction. The beginner and intermediate students receive 360 minutes of ENL/ESL instruction. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Native language support is delivered to our Freestanding ENL/ESL program with materials such as dictionaries, novels, picture books, and visual aids. ELLs are encouraged to buddy up and interact with others who speak the same home language and can assist and translate for them. Bilingual teachers, school aides, and other staff members also interact with students in their native language. Based on New York State testing guidelines, ELLs are given the opportunity to use a translated version of the NYS Math, Science, and Social Studies exams along with glossaries. Students who speak and read in a language that is not one of the translated languages provided by the state are given the opportunity to use a bilingual glossary published by the Department of Education. English language learners use laptops in the classrooms to reinforce vocabulary and concepts through pictures, graphics and video. They also benefit from being able to use technology to express themselves. Technology helps English language learners find a voice, easing the transition to a new language. To help students learn as much as possible and to demonstrate that knowledge,we equipped all classrooms with the interactive whiteboard. This technology is an excellent tool for presenting multimedia lessons and encouraging student participation. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist newly enrolled ELLs, we encourage them to attend our non-mandated Title III Summer Enrichment Program. This program is taught by fully licensed ENL/ESL teachers. The goal of this program is to improve English language proficiency and advance content area learning as well and contextualized vocabulary and language development and academic achievement. This program also offers parental involvement activities. There are some activities that involve our incoming students in our school: 1  • City Harvest (collection of canned goods and winter coats). • Hart-to-Hart (distribute of backpacks in September- Coats in December) • Student council (monthly Sprit Day events- visit to City Hall to meet with council members) • P.A. Thanksgiving Multicultural Pot luck • Box out Bullying is a national organization that specializes in combining research based bullying prevention with dynamic live theater. Bullying is a national social problem in our school system. The Box out Bullying program engages audience through all learning mods auditory, visual, and kinesthetic. Students learn by seeing, listening, and doing, which produces better results than using a video, a book, or a single lecture. This program empowers students to be stand-up citizens and key players in ending bullying. That School staff that are involved in this activities are : Principal, School Counselor, Social Worker, School Psychologist, Speech Therapist, Assistant Principal, ENL/SETSS/IEP Coordinator, UFT Chapter leader, and School Librarian. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ELL teachers are provided with professional development sessions in Standards for English Language Arts and for Literacy in History/Social Studies and Science that are given throughout the city. Upon return to the school they turn-key and share new findings. These workshops take place throughout the year. New ELL teachers are also mentored by our ELL senior teachers. A variety of in-house professional development given throughout the year include the following: 1. Inquiry cycle - rotations will be grouped as follows: PreK and K; Grades 1 & 2; Grades 3 - 5. These groups will analyze the student work of one ELL and one former ELL student to determine if they are on grade level based on Reading and Math assessments. 2. IB Units - the LAC plans with the teachers to provide strategies for ELL students around academic vocabulary and integrated content area instruction. 3. Standalone PD - the LAC conducts a needs assessment of ELL students performance for the following: * NYS Learning Progressions * ELL strategies within Journey's and Go Math * NYC/NYS Mandates 4. Schoolwide teacher surveys inquiring about ELL instruction and student progress. Our ELLs Personnel Team are: Dr. Samantha B. Maisonet, Principal Anthony Bentivegna, Assistant Principal Vicky Fernandez, School Counselor Lauren Mora, Instructional Coach ELA/Math 2  Maysa Ismail, ENL/SETSS/ IEP Coordinator Dian Costello, Library Naida Ryans, Parent Coordinator P. Papazoglou, Bilingual Para V. Sena, School Psychologist M. Cardona, Bilingual Occupational Therapist R. Giannattasio, School Secretary The Professional Development Program will focus on providing teachers, Assistant Principals, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, psychologists, OTs, PTs, and Speech therapists with differentiated and scaffolding instruction strategies for English Language Learners. It will be long term and ongoing. It will focus on how to prepare ELLs to meet and exceed the Common Core Learning Standards and to achieve higher scores on the state exams. The sessions will be facilitated by Network ELL support staff and the ELL Coordinator. They will take place from September through June. Some topics that will be addressed are: - Scaffolding across the disciplines - Conferencing with students - Strategies needed to prepare ELLs for the NYSESLAT - A session will be devoted to mathematical instruction strategies to enhance student skills and performance on city and state tests. Training on scaffolding instruction for ELLs is given throughout the year to incorporate ENL/ESL strategies in all subject areas. Additional support is given to enhance differentiated instruction, teaching reading and writing skills, transitioning students to English proficiency, aligning classroom rubrics and ENL/ESL rubrics together and working with newcomers. Constant collaboration is a standard practice between the ENL/ESL and classroom teachers. Teachers participate in routine professional development, including training in Wilson Fundations. They also have monthly professional meetings with the Principal and Instructional Coach. Curriculum, instruction, assessment and student work are discussed at these meetings. ENL/ESL teachers collaborate regularly with the teachers in whose classes they push-in to plan for ENL/ESL methodologies to use in their lessons, creating an environment for language acquisition in their classroom, identifying the stages of language acquisition, including newcomers in all classroom lessons, encouraging ELLs to participate, various ways to assist newcomers/beginners, program placement, testing, mandates, and grading ELLs. ENL/ESL teachers meet on a regular basis to discuss the progress of their students and share instructional strategies and resources. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We support and assist parents and ELL students as they move from our school to middle school by explaining their options. The guidance counselor attend the Queens North Middle School Admissions training at IS 25. The guidance counselor has a meeting in November to explain the middle school process to the parents of ELLs. All others are advised to check the middle school directory for schools with appropriate Bilingual/ENL/dual language programs. In the spring a meeting is held where students meet with middle school Principal and staff and tour the middle school to help them feel more comfortable. The specific activities the guidance counselor received are middle choice PD and other PD opportunities regarding transition. The Parent Coordinator works with the ENL/ESL teachers to make all staff aware of the supports available in the school and community that will assist students and families to succeed. All staff, grades pre-kindergarten through grade five, received 7.5 hours of ELL training.This training was provided by an outside source. It focused on developing students’ abilities to read, discuss, and write academic text in English as part of their rigorous academic instruction. Additional ELL training is provided at grade meetings and monthly ENL/ESL/academic intervention staff meetings to ensure compliance of the 7.5 hours for new teachers. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching 3  strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Records of the PD training and grade meetings are kept by the LAC and Instructional Coach. A binder specific to all building PD's is maintained and stored in the principal's office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1. Our ELL Parents are informed of the different school functions through flyers in English, Spanish, Bengali, etc. There are ELL orientations throughout the school year to inform parents of the ELL programs. They are also invited to attend workshops that will give them the opportunity to better assist in the education and learning of their children at home. Our Parent Coordinator is bilingual (English and Spanish) and serves as a translator when needed. Some topics that are specific to ELL parents are: a. Homework tips b. Becoming familiar with the learning standards and the NYSESLAT assessment c. Parental choices for ELLs d. Financial Planning and Employment These workshops are given by the Parent Coordinator in conjunction with the ENL/ESL teachers. In addition to these workshops the family worker conducts on-going English classes for all parents who wish to learn English. Our school requires individual meetings with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting should include school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English and in the child’s home language in the case of students enrolled in a bilingual education program. Such meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. Schools must determine the manner and form of such individual parent meetings, in accordance with collective bargaining agreements. Schools should record attendance using existing procedures. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In addition to the ELL workshops described above, the Parent Coordinator provides workshops and classes that are open to all parents in addition to the ELL parents. Some of those activities are nutrition classes , breast cancer awareness, stress management and CPR classes (given by FDNY). These workshops are a result of the parent survey conducted at the beginning of the school year. The school Parents Coordinator who is fluent in the language in which she is communicating and in English, has a demonstrated ability to employ the mode of interpretation appropriate to the given situation (e.g., simultaneous interpretation for hearings or large-group parent meetings), and has received training in specialized issues, such as confidentiality and any applicable technical vocabulary. Also school staff members who meet this criteria, such as a bilingual teacher, certified pursuant to State regulations, may be qualified to serve as an interpreter/translator. Translation services that are available in school are Arabic, Bengali, Spanish, Greek, Italian, and Urdu. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 4  The diversity of PS151Q's population is valued through the use of the IB profiles. Activities and lessons are geared to address different learning styles and to support students' social-emotional well being. The 2016 Frameworks for Great Schools Report indicates that PS 151Q exceeds the citywide average in the Supportive Environment category. In order to maintain these high expectations we will continue to adjust curriculum and pedagogical practices. With the use of The Sanford Harmony Program (SHP) teachers are provided with a set of tools that foster and support social emotional connections among students and that develop positive peer relationships that will enable them to thrive in school. 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Samantha Maisonet, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Mary D. Carter School DBN: 30Q151 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Dr. Samantha B. Maisonet Principal Anthony Bentivegna Assistant Principal Naida Ryans Maysa Ismail Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Elizabeth Lugo Parent Diane Costello Teacher/Subject Area Sandra Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area Lauren Mora Coach Coach Vicki Fernandez School Counselor Dr. Philip Composto N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Victoria Sena Other School Psychologist N/A N/A Other Other 06/20/2018 06/20/2018 06/20/2018 06/20/2018 06/20/2018 06/20/2018 06/20/2018 06/20/2018 06/20/2018 06/20/2018 06/20/2018 06/20/2018 1/1/01 1/1/01 7 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Mary D. Carter Superintendent: Dr. P. Composto DBN: 30Q151 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Coordinator Maysa n/a n/a n/a Ismail ENL YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When a parent registers their child they fill out a Home Language Survey. This determines the language spoken at home. Part 3, questions 1&2 ask which language parents would like to receive information in. We use these responses to determine the languages for which we need to provide translations. We have found that we need to provide translation services in different languages such as Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, and Chinese. The majority request English but we have a large number of parents requesting Spanish as well. Parent s' preferred languages for both written and oral communication are Spanish, Arabic, Chinese, and Urdu. 8  Furthermore, we consider additional ways to collect data: ATS Report of Preferred Languages, Blue Card data, Parent Surveys, Teacher Survey (collect data by class). 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral We have found that we need to provide translation services in different languages such as Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, and Chinese. The majority request English but we have a large number of parents requesting Spanish. The following information is updated monthly. 2018 - 19 Language Survey by Grade & Class PK – 217 Spanish, Greek, Italian, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi PK – 215 Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, Tibetan PK – 205 Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, Chinese PK – 219 Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, Chinese PK - 207 Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, Chinese K - 319 Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, Chinese English, Spanish, Urdu, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Punjabi, Tibetan n/a English, Spanish, Urdu, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Punjabi, Tibetan n/a English, Spanish, Urdu, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Punjabi, Tibetan Arabic= 1.29% Bengali= 2.31% Chinese= 1.29 English=70.95 Punjabi= 1.03% Spanish=22.37% Tibetan= 0 Urdu=51% English, Spanish, Urdu, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Punjabi, Tibetan Arabic 1.29 Bengali=2.3% Chinese= 1.29 English= 69.67% Punjabi= 1.03 Spanish= 23.14 Tibetan= .26% Urdu=51% 9  K - 315 Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, Chinese, Tibetan K - 209 Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, Chinese 1 - 313 Spanish, Greek, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, Chinese 1 - 305 Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, Chinese 1 - 307 Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, Chinese, Polish 2 - 302 Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, Chinese, Tagalog 2 - 303 Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, Chinese K/1/2 - 301 Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, Chinese English, Spanish, Urdu, Arabic See above data English, Spanish, Urdu, Arabic See above data 3 - 419 Spanish, Greek, Italian, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, Chinese 3 - 417 Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi, Chinese 4 - 401 Spanish, Arabic 4 - 402 Spanish, Urdu, Chinese 5 - 413 Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi English, Spanish, Urdu, Arabic See above data English, Spanish, Urdu, Arabic See above data 5 - 407 Spanish, Urdu, Punjabi 3/4/5 - 409 Spanish 0  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Annual handbooks and general overview of student curriculum, Sep 9, 2018 . All translations are completed by various staff members under the supervision of the parent coordinator. monthly newsletters for parents, calendars, Parent/Teacher Conference announcements and monthly letters from the School Leadership Team and Parent Association. Monthly After-school program information December 2017 All translations are completed by various staff members under the supervision of the parent coordinator. All translations are completed by various staff members under the 1  NYS testing dates February, March and April 2018 supervision of the parent coordinator. All translations are completed by various staff members under the supervision of the parent coordinator. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher conferences, These will occur based on the DOE calendar as well as when needed Parent Engagement Time Tuesdays from 2:20-3:35pm interpretation service(s)? All translations are completed by various staff members under the supervision of the parent coordinator. All translations are completed by various staff members under the supervision of the parent coordinator. PA meetings These will occur based on the schools calendar created by the PA and approved by the principal All translations are completed by various staff members under the supervision of the parent coordinator. Guidance As needed All translations are completed by various staff members under the supervision of the parent coordinator. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; school will use the school messenger system to inform parents with any emergencies. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff, grades pre-kindergarten through grade five, received 7.5 hours of ELL training.This training was provided by an outside source. It focused on developing students’ abilities to read, discuss, and write academic text in English as part of their rigorous academic instruction. Additional ELL training is provided at grade meetings and monthly ENL/ESL/academic intervention staff meetings to ensure compliance of the 7.5 hours for new teachers. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for 2  English language learners. Records of the PD training and grade meetings are kept by the LAC and Instructional Coach. A binder specific to all building PD's is maintained and stored in the principal's office. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) A sign is posted at the main door that indicates the interpretation services that are available. Parents are advised of their rights when they register their child at our school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Coordinator surveys, PA meeting feedback, communication (e.g., letters to classroom teachers, Guidance Counselor, etc.) P.S 151 founded a focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school to gather feedback and best practices on parent engagement and student academic and emotional well-being. 3 
