 School Name: 27Q155 P.S. 155 Principal: GREGORY JACOBS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Ronald H. Brown School 342700010155 Pre-K, Kindergarten, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 School Number (DBN): 27Q155 130-02 115 th Avenue, South Ozone Park, NY 11420 718-558-1310 718-529-0773 Phone Number: Fax: Gregory Jacobs GJacobs@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Gregory Jacobs Wandra Blocker Lisa Hafeez Melanie Collins Doris Nesmith None None District Information Mary Barton Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, NY 11420 MBarton@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5770 Phone Number: 718-348-2994 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director:   82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, NY 11420 Executive Director’s Office Address: MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: 718-348-2994 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Gregory Jacobs Wandra Blocker Lisa Hafeez Terry Hill Jason Koo Melanie Collins *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Teacher   Lisa Hafeez LizaRamnarain AshaTewari Pamela Fuller BhagwattieRam kumar Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission statement: We the staff, parents, and students of the Ronald H Brown School commit ourselves to a high standard of academic, social, emotional, and physical excellence. This message is a part of our morning announcements each day and a message that is embedded in every activity throughout the school day. This message also is related to our School-  Wide focus for this past year: providing enrichment opportunities that enhance the learning and heighten character development to the whole child (academically, socially, emotionally and physically). 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Ronald H. Brown School is an elementary school located in the heart of South Ozone Park. We are not only a school in the community but a community school. We service 530 scholars from grades pre-k through 5th grade. Our diverse population of scholars and staff members is what makes our school successful. The knowledge shared and values we learn from one another makes each individual stronger and the expectation to thrive to be college and career ready more defined. The current population of students consists of 28% Asian, 25% Black, 21% Hispanic, 2% White, and 24% other. Our English Language Learners make up 9% of our population and our Special Education students make up 14%. 92% of our students are eligible for free-lunch. Character Development/ Principal’s Book of the Month/ Student of the Month: Develop and strengthen student’s personal and social responsibilities. Positive character traits are taught and enhanced through the Principal’s Book of the Month. Students are encouraged to exhibit and apply these character traits to their everyday lives, while they reflect and respond to a task. Students faced with socio-emotional challenges engage in ongoing, dynamic character building lessons with the support of the guidance counselor. Students with exemplary character are honored as Student of the Month. Partnerships include: Queens College, Queens District Attorney Office and other agencies. The RICH Program and 3 rd, 4 th and 5 th Grade Leadership Teams & Service Learning: Programs focus to promote College and Career Readiness via lessons related to building positive character, development of leadership skills, high academic and behavioral expectations by way of engagement in community service and team projects. The Leadership Teams serve as the representatives for the school. The students began a Student Voices Matter box. There is a place where students can put their questions and or concerns. The Leadership Team reviews the forms and generates a school student survey and/or brings the concerns to the administration. Partnerships include: Penny Harvest, The River Fund, and Habitat for Humanity. Reading Rescue an intervention support program designed to push our struggling 1 st grade students has been an empowering and self-motivating experience. This program has enhanced the love of learning for our 1 st grade scholars while increasing parent involvement and empowering our para-professionals with the opportunity to act as the program coordinator and having a stake in the educational growth and well-being of a child. We have had parents speak to our parent population in regard to recruitment of parents and the research that supports this program. Parents and para-professionals have also facilitated a professional development workshop to provide strategies to our pre-k through grade 2 teachers to further develop their knowledge of a teaching a child to read. Cluster Enrichment Activities have increased parent involvement and strengthened student participation while enhancing our ELA program. Our cluster teachers, music, art, technology, library, and physical education have developed curriculum maps that support our ReadyGen curriculum and have also provided opportunities for parent involvement. This year our parents were able to experience the talents of our scholars through a Science Fair in which all grades participated in a hands-on experiment, an Art Gallery, musical performances, and project based learning activities as part of the library program. In order to support our school wide focus we have pushed the rigor in all of the cluster classrooms and have devoted our time to establishing the child as a whole. This year we will be expanding 0  the STEAM initiative which is an enrichment program which provides learning opportunities unique to each individual. These experiences are real world applicable and academically based. Partnership with CUNY Technology Initiatives: To advance student learning with the use of technology the school has partnered with CUNY for support in training on the most up to date technology and programs available. I- Ready, Safari Montage, Achieve 3000, Imagine Learning, and Study Island are some of the programs we use to support our learners. I-Ready a differentiated learning program was purchased for ALL scholars in grades 2-5 in both ELA and math. A workbook version was purchased for all grades which included our grade K and 1 scholars. Curriculum Maps Our maps are the blueprint for learning at our school. They are a living document and are continually updated to reflect current best practices and nuances as needed. Project Based Learning has been an emphasis this year and these projects haven now been embedded into the maps. As a push to include HOT questions, the teachers worked collaboratively to revise the ReadyGen and Go Math questions to reflect the critical thinking skills as part of Webb’s Depth of Knowledge, Hess’ Cognitive Rigor Matrix, and Bloom’s Taxonomy. Data Data has been an open book. Data is shared amongst classroom teachers, and grades. Monthly data talks with administration allow teams to discuss strategies and discuss the strengths and challenges for their scholars and for any curricular or pedagogical deficiencies. Data is streamlined into specific tracking sheets for ALL assessments. The data is analyzed and compared across grades and across units. Daily checkpoints in both ELA and math help in the close of achievement gaps for the specific units. This is what drives the updates to our curriculum maps. This data is also shared with the parents following each meeting. Parent Involvement This year we have made increasing parent involvement a priority. We have the monthly PS 155 Gazette which includes articles from all grades including special service providers, the guidance counselor, clusters, scholars, and administration. These articles include the current topics scholars are studying along with strategies parents can use to help support their child at home. We have a PS 155 website which allows immediate communication to parents of upcoming events, news, and calendar information. In order to support the home-school connection we have provided training to the parents in Khan Academy and LearnZillion which are web based resources in math and ELA. These sites provide tutorials on current concepts to reinforce the learning that is taking place in our school for all grades. Challenges/Focus The challenge at PS 155 for this school year is to deepen the use of questioning in our classrooms in all subjects and continue to improve on our student to student discussions. We have built into our curriculum maps a minimum of two higher order questions in ELA and have adapted questions in Go Math to be reflective of the HOT questions posed in the chapter test. In both ELA and math, the teachers will revise their quickchecks (daily assessment) to be more indicative of the ELA, PBA and math chapter test. The teachers are using the backward design model to identify the skills needed to be successful on these assessments. While the use of questioning and discussion has improved, there is still room to grow in this area. Teachers have begun to move beyond the turn and talk strategy and are ready to move forward and act as a facilitator of a discussion. We have sound systems in each classroom to help support this best practice. For the 2018-19 school year our focus is to embed assessment practices into the daily routine in all subject areas to inform small group instruction. A team of educators sharing best practices, reflecting on their practice and keeping abreast of educational nuances, we follow the motto we share with our scholars, never give up! 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 1  Students with disabilities need additional support in Mathematics as identified in their achievement results. In 2016 we had 16.7% of our SWD population as proficient in Mathematics. In 2017 we had 14.3% of our SWD population as proficient. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The school utilized Monday Professional Development time revising maps to address areas of concern based on the data collected across the entire curriculum. This enabled us to drill down and anticipate possible obstacles students would encounter and provide intervention for struggling scholars. In this process we were also able to identify areas of strength and adjust our maps to go deeper in those topics. This work led to a more rigorous curriculum across all subjects. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q155 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 520 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 38 37 24 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 15 24 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 81.5% % Reduced Lunch 7.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 22.5% % Black or African American 20.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.08 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 58.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 97% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged YES YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS YES YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 22 20 24 94.1% 10.2% 12.5% 22.5% 31.3% 23.7% 4 3% 5.4 69.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school adopted the Go Math Program for grades K-5 in September 2012. The program is aligned to the Common Core and students have shown growth from 2016 to 2017 on the New York State Math Exam. However, there are still gaps that need to be addressed. The 2017-2018 New York State Mathematics Exams showed that:  68% of 3rd grade students are proficient in Mathematics.  75.6% of 4th grade students are proficient in Mathematics.  62.3% of 5th grade students are proficient in Mathematics. For the 2017 - 2018 Mathematics State Exam, 69% of the scholars were proficient in Math. While gains of 5% were noted, there continues to be gaps. To address this concern, curriculum maps will be updated using a backward design to review the test and task for each chapter based on the 2017 - 2018 Go Math Chapter test data. Then we will identify lessons where students modeled mastery and see which lessons can be collapsed together. Also, identify lessons where students struggled and expand the time frame for those lessons as well as develop scaffolded instruction to prevent future drop off. We will also incorporate the usage of the interactive student edition for lessons where students struggled based off the 2017 - 2018 Quickcheck data. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 4  By June 2019, 80% of the students in grades K to 5 will receive an average score of 90% as measured by the Go Math assessments. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Identified students will receive academic Math intervention during and after school. In addition, one F-status Math coach will support identified students to provide additional help in deficient areas. Math Teachers and Administration will meet in a vertical alignment to share best practices and develop resources to support scholars. Math enrichment will be provided to students during class in the forms of enrichment packets and Go Math enrichment worksheets. Math teachers will teach scholars the skills to self-evaluate, as well as conduct a peer-assessment. Math teachers will teach students the skills to justify their solutions, as well as be able to speak to their solution in a student centered forum. Math teachers will provide rubrics and checklists in support of this strategy. Teachers and administration will work collaboratively with parents to improve student outcomes, by utilizing the flip classroom model, hands-on Math workshops and instructional website (Think Central) to help parents support their children with additional strategies for Math. In addition, resources will be added to the school website to support parents at home (for example: instructional packets and instructional websites). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students in grades K-5. September 2018 – June 2019. Teachers and Administrators. Students in grades K-5. September 2018 – June 2019. Teachers Students in grades K-5, Parents and teachers. September 2018 – June 2019. Teachers and Administrators. ELL and Students with Disabilities will receive additional Math support during the school day and after-school. Special Education Teachers, Speciality Service Providers, and Administration will meet to discuss best practices, and instructional strategies to support these scholars. Students K-5. ENL and students with disabilities. September 2018 – June 2019. Teachers and Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families through constant communication centered around student achievement. The first item is to utilize the Tuesday afternoon time to invite parents in for meetings or to communicate with them via telephone or electronic methods such as e-mail or Class Dojo. We will also use the Tuesday afternoon time to invite families in every 6 weeks to host a curriculum night. This meeting will be to share the upcoming content that will be covered in the next unit, key strategies to support students, and activities that parents can do to support their children. The 6  second item is to provide constant feedback on student progress. After each chapter assessment we will provide updates via mail merge on the students' current progress in the Go Math curriculum. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Go Math Program including the embedded assessments and supplemental resources, Smart Boards, Think Central, , ENL Teachers, Laptops/IPad, I-Ready Program Software, Professional Learning Sessions, and Go Math Teacher Training. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 80% of the students in grades K to 5 will demonstrate an average of at least 88% increase in math achievement as measured by the Go Math assessments in comparison from the current year to the prior year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Go Math Chapters Tests, Benchmark Assessments, Think Central usage reports, and Observations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the 2017 framework for great schools report on average 88% of parents feel positive about parental involvement in the school. According to the NYC school survey report for 2016 - 2017, 75% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they are invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all students in grades 3 - 5 including students with disabilities and English language learners will present student led-conferences to their parents as measured by parent sign-in logs. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers and Administrators will work collaboratively to develop a prototype/structure in implementing student-led conferences. Teachers and Administrators will create a study group/inquiry team to research best practices and content. In addition, we will visit schools who have established student-led conferences to see best practices. Teachers and Administrators will provide professional development and intervisitation opportunities. As part of developing our professional development we will reach out to appropriate professional development supports such as the borough field support center. Students will prepare for their student-led conferences by using the skills they have developed in class when conducting in-class peer-to-peer evaluations using the peer-assessment rubrics. Some additional in class strategies that will be practiced will be student self-reflection and conferencing with the teacher to promote the skills of intrinsic reflection and providing actionable feedback. Teachers will develop checklists and rubrics in support of these strategies. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All third, fourth and fifth grade students. All third, fourth and fifth grade students. All third, fourth and fifth grade students. All third, fourth and fifth grade students. September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019. September 2018 – June 2019. Teachers and Administrators. Teachers and Administrators. Teachers and Administrators. Teachers September 2018 – June 2019. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families through constant communication centered around student achievement. The first item is to utilize the Tuesday afternoon time to invite parents in for meetings or to communicate with them via telephone or electronic methods such as e-mail or Class Dojo. We will also use the Tuesday afternoon time to invite families in every 6 weeks to host a curriculum night. This meeting will be to share the upcoming content that will be covered in the next unit, key strategies to support students, and activities that parents can do to support their children. The second item is to provide constant feedback on student progress. After each chapter assessment we will provide 9  updates via mail merge on the students' current progress in the Go Math and ELA curriculum. Monthly newsletters will be distributed which includes strategies and highlights scholars academic behaviors. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will be allowed to use classroom time to practice and prepare students for the student led conferences. Administration and teachers met and agreed to use one Friday afternoon per month for preparation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 15, 2019, all fourth and fifth graders will have conducted a student-led conference. This will be measured by parent sign in sheets and student-led conference forms. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Teacher Conference attendance forms and Advance Observations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017 NYS ELA Assessment, 48 % of students met proficiency levels. It is important to note that the school scored above the city average by 2.2% and .6% above the district average. The most current Quality Review notes as an area of well- developed the school: engages in structured collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning. As a school community it is a priority for members to meet horizontally and vertically to share best practices. As an area of need, we need to ensure the school is providing engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards. As a K-5 school it is important for teachers to communicate with each other in order to inform their practice with the vertical expectations of the ELA Common Core Learning Standards. Increasing instructional coherence will address student gaps and support academic strengths. According to the 2017-18 ReadyGen Performance based assessment/End of Unit data, the area of focus will be on including relevant facts and details in PBA"s and EOU writing assignments. This was evident in grades 1 -5. The data from the 2017 NYS ELA Exam states 48% of our scholars are proficient in ELA. This data shows there is progress that still needs to be made. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, scholars in grades 3-5 will show an increase of 5% on the Language/Vocabulary Domain as measured by the end of the year ReadyGen PBA Assessment. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A baseline for student writing will be established at the beginning of the school year. Mid-year and end of year performance tasks in writing will be administered to measure student growth. Teachers will make adjustments to their teaching as needed, and provide students with strategies to improve their writing. Teacher teams will meet to analyze student baseline writing samples to identify gaps in student understanding of the writing process and identify strategies to support student Enrichment will be provided through the use of the Scaffolded Strategies Handbook and Enrichment Packets. These packets will be revised throughout the year to include rigorous, collaborative learning tasks for all scholars in align with all modules. Scholars will be accountable for their work by reflecting on their writing by the use of a checklist and a rubric. They will extend this practice to conduct peer reviews. Students with disabilities and English Language Learners will be provided with multiple entry points and support for each lesson. Additional support will be provided during and after school. The ReadyGen Scaffolded Strategies Handbook will be utilized. Special Education Teachers, Specialty Service providers, and Administration will meet to share best practices for all learners. Workshops will be provided to parents to assist them in supporting their children with writing at the onset of a new unit. These workshops will include the expectations, themes, key vocabulary, and strategies to support their child. In addition, they will receive exemplar writing samples in the different genres alongside the rubrics. A monthly newsletter and a parent expectation letter will be sent home providing parents with writing tips and strategies. LearnZillion and Benchmark Universe are resources parents will utilize as a support. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K-5 students, teachers September 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers K-5 Students September 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers ENL and SWD students, September 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers, ELL and Special Education teachers, teachers Administrators K-5 Students, teachers, September 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers, School Administrators Parents 2  Complex Reading in Context: Vocabulary in Context books were purchased. These books will be utilized as a "Do Now," activity as part of the ELA block. Identified scholars will receive targeted ELA intervention support. Afterschool will be provided and a "F" status person will be hired to support student achievement. Monday professional development will be geared toward vocabulary development. ELA teachers will meet in a vertical team to share best practices and conduct intervisitations. 3-5 students September 2018-2019 teachers Grade 3-5 students December 2018-April 2019 teachers Classroom teachers and School Administrators Classroom teachers and School Administrators Grade 3-5 Teachers September 2018-2019 Classroom teachers and School Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families through constant communication centered around student achievement. The first item is to utilize the Tuesday afternoon time to invite parents in for meetings or to communicate with them via telephone or electronic methods such as e-mail or Class Dojo. We will also use the Tuesday afternoon time to invite families in every 6 weeks to host a curriculum night. This meeting will be to share the upcoming content that will be covered in the next unit, key strategies to support students, and activities that parents can do to support their children. The second item is to provide constant feedback on student progress. After each chapter assessment we will provide updates via mail merge on the students' current progress in the ELA curriculum. Monthly newsletters will be distributed which includes strategies and highlights scholars academic behaviors. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 3  MOSL Baseline Writing Task, Mid-Year Performance Task, Rubrics, Checklists, Norming & Scoring sessions, Ready Gen. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 2% of students will show growth in the Language/Vocabulary Domain as measured by the middle of the year ReadyGen PBA rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid-year performance task based on the ReadyGen PBA rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018, Measure of Teacher Practice data (3D) Using Assessment in Instruction data, 6.3% of the teachers were developing and 89.76% of the teachers were effective. According to our most recent Quality Review Report, Year 2015 - 2016. Instructional core item 1.2 was an area of Focus and rated Proficient. Through component 3D of using assessment in instruction, we will use this information to develop and improve teacher pedagogy, as well as modify curriculum so that all students will produce meaningful work products. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will be observed a minimum of three times and be provided with targeted and actionable feedback resulting in 85% of the staff having a rating effective or highly effective in Component 3d of the Danielson Framework. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Observe teachers a minimum of 3 times and provide them with rubric-based actionable feedback following observations in both written and verbal form. All K-5 Classroom Teachers Provide on-going targeted professional development for teachers on strategies to promote student engagement and meet the needs of all students at their entry points. Utilize resources from Advance to support teacher growth in component 3d using Assessment in Instruction. Teachers rated “Developing” on the Danielson Framework. September 2018 – June 2019. September 2018 – June 2019 Provide PD on using assessment in instruction such as using a backwards design in modifying the curriculum to meet students' needs. Provide ongoing curriculum nights to share strategies with parents to support learning at home All classroom teachers and specialty providers September 2018- June 2019 All teachers including SPED and ENL September 2018 -June 2019 Administrators Administrators, Teacher-Led Professional Development, Borough Field Operations Staff, Professional Development Citywide Administrators, Classroom teachers Administrators and Teachers including Special Education and ENL staff Parents will be provided with parent outreach letters that shares assessment scores and strategies parents can use at home Parents and Students September 2018-2019 Administrators and Teachers including Special Education and ENL staff 6  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In analyzing the student work product and data, we will share the discoveries with families. In addition, we will share what we believe are best practices that can be transferred over to the home setting to support students. The key personnel involved will be administration, teachers, and the parent coordinator. Administration and teachers will meet to review data and discuss best practices. Teachers will share with families the teams' discoveries. The parent coordinator will act as a liaison for families who want to procure more information. The meeting between teachers and administration will occur at least once a month. Outreach will provided at minimum, every Tuesday during Family Outreach time. In addition, teachers will conduct a curriculum night approximately every six weeks to share current content and strategies to support students at home with the families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Danielson Framework for Teaching, Talent Coach/JESA visit and feedback, Borough field support center personnel, (Inter-visitation /PL) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, administrators will observe all teachers at least three times and provide feedback, resulting in at least 50% of teachers rated effective/highly effective in 3D of the Danielson Framework. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Classroom Observation Report on Advance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Attendance figures from 2017-2018 events indicate that approximately 8% of parents regularly attended Parent Association meetings. According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey sixty-three (63%) percent of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. Parent Attendance from 2017 to 2018 23 Parent Workshops = 426 9 School Events = 976 Parent Association Meetings = 558 Parent Teacher Conferences = 1,619 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an eight (8%) percent increase in parent attendance/participation at school functions including parent workshops, school events, parent association meetings and parent-teacher conferences. This will be measured by sign in sheets. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Community partnerships with York College which holds a Saturday Leadership Program for 4 th and 5 th grade students and Jamaica Hospital operates a medical clinic on the school premises. Fundraising walks for Breast Cancer, American Heart Association and other agencies Other organizations include, Asthma Coalition, Healthfirst, Immigration, TD Bank and the library. School activities including family/centered events such as Family Day BBS and Carnival, Art Gallery Evening, Science Fair workshops that address: ELA/Math Common Core Standards and State Exams, Discipline, Cornell Health and Nutrition, Parenting, Domestic Violence, Breakfast with Mothers , changes to Part 154 Regulation, and Breakfast with Fathers. To support subgroups teachers scaffold instruction, use F & P intervention kits, color code, and use Ladder books. Regular communication with parents through School Messenger, progress reports, e-mail data base, school newsletter, Class Dojo, presentations at PTA meetings, Mail Merge letters and e-mails, Tuesday afternoon parent engagement sessions. Unpack the Unit Night: occur quarterly in addition to the PTC night. These are for teachers to share information/strategies in regard to the upcoming math and ELA units for the parents. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K-5 Parents and Students September 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator All K-5 Parent and Students September 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator All K-5 Parents September 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers, School Leadership, Parent Coordinator Parents volunteer to support first and second grade scholars through Reading Rescue. Parents and Students September 2018 - June 2019 Paraprofessionals and Parents Parent will volunteer time to support the River Fund which provides life coaching skills and CityHarvest which supports under privileged people. 9  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We will engage families through constant communication centered around student achievement. The first item is to utilize the Tuesday afternoon time to invite parents in for meetings or to communicate with them via telephone or electronic methods such as e-mail or Class Dojo. We will also use the Tuesday afternoon time to invite families in every 6 weeks to host a curriculum night. This meeting will be to share the upcoming content that will be covered in the next unit, key strategies to support students, and activities that parents can do to support their children. The second item is to provide constant feedback on student progress. After each chapter assessment we will provide updates via mail merge on the students' current progress in the Go Math and ELA curriculum. Monthly newsletters will be distributed which includes strategies and highlights scholars academic behaviors. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, Workshops, Tuesday afternoon parent engagement, Jamaica Hospital, school messenger, SLT, Reading Rescue, Partnership with York College. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2.5% increase in parent attendance at school functions including instructional based parent workshops, Parent Association meetings, and family events. This will be measured by attendance sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets from Parent Workshops, Events, and Conferences will be total and compared to the previous year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) - New York State English Language Arts State Scores - F&P Reading Levels - ReadyGen Baseline Assessments - Teacher Recommendation - Formative and Summative Assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) - Response to Intervention (RTI) - Small group instruction - During the school day - Tutoring - After-School -Fountas & Pinnell (Benchmark Assessments and Progress Monitoring - ReadyGen Quick Checks - I-Ready Online Interactive Program - ReadyGen Scaffold Book Instruction - ReadyGen Phonics - Engage NY - Progressive Workbooks - Reading Rescue - Small Group Instruction led by F-Status Personnel (From January to April) - After-School Academy - Push-In and Pull-Out support provided 1  Mathematics - New York State Mathematics State Scores - Go Math Baseline Assessments. - Teacher Recommendation - Formative and Summative Assessments by Special Services Personnel - Go Math Response to Intervention - Small group instruction - During the school day - I-Ready workbooks - Tutoring - After-School - I-Ready Online Interactive Program - Progressive Workbooks - Engage NY - Push-In and Pull-Out support provided by Special Services Personnel - After-School Academy - Small Group Instruction led by F-Status Personnel (From January to April) Science - Science Test Scores - Teacher Recommendation - Formative and Summative Assessments - Teacher Recommendation - Formative and Summative Assessments - Anecdotal Reports - Teacher Recommendation Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) - Foss and Full Option Science System - Small group instruction - Harcourt School Publishing NYC Edition - Tutoring - During the school day - Broadworks - Ready workbooks - Passport to Social Studies - Small group instruction - During the school day - Tutoring Individual and group sessions reflect the measurable goals set for individual students. These goals focus on social and - Small group instruction - One-on-One - During the school day 2  - OORS Incident Reports emotional learning with a variety of topics such as: anger and anxiety management; solving social problems; empathy training; goal setting; career development and cooperative play. - The Psychologist provides short term intervention for academic planning. - The Social Worker provides short term intervention for academic planning. - Jamaica School Based Clinic provides medical and social issues on a one to one session or small group 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 14 students in temporary housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH scholars are provided with supplement school supplies, clothing and food as needed . After-school, AIS, and counseling services are provided as needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Utilized Teacher Finder Network to recruit, identify and hire HQT. ● New teachers are matched with a mentor. ● All teachers receive Professional Development from internal and external coaches and trainers. Teacher fair Partnership with Old Westbury: Student Teachers HQT Recommendations Colleague Referrals 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Professional development in ReadyGen and Go Math are ongoing throughout the school year. ● Additional Professional Development was provided on Election Day on Integrating Technology into the Curriculum. ● The Field Support Center will also provide professional development. ● Teachers also receive individualized PD based on low frequency informal observations. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 6  n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● Pre-Kindergarten teachers will read and discuss transitions to kindergarten. ● Meet and Greet Kindergarten Teachers ● Early Childhood Coordinator visits once monthly to ensure ESI testing is complete, Classroom Environment is properly set up. ● Walking tour of the cafeteria ● Plan visits to Kindergarten classrooms ● Parent Workshops conducted by the Pre-K Social worker. ● Participate in District family forum workshop on the getting ready for kindergarten. ● Workshop on the new kindergarten admission process in January. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers provide feedback to administration on assessment during monthly date meetings, teacher team and Inquiry team meetings. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 7  plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 67586 Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x Column B Section Reference(s) p. 14-15, 19-20, 22-23, 24-25 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local N/A N/A N/A n/a x x x x p. 15,18, 20-21, 23, 25 p. 15,18, 20, 21, 23, 25 x p.14,15,18,19,20,21,22,23,25 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 8  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 155 School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 155 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 0  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; 1  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 155 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 3  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 4  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 1 1 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PS. 155Q will support our ELL’s through our literacy and math programs. Our students’ instructional focus will be on the strategies for comprehension, using both group assessments such as unit testing and writing assignments as well as individual conferences and Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments to determine skills which need to be the instructional focus. Data analysis indicated that comprehension skills (higher level inference and multi-step questions) in the areas of reading and math as well as the ability to express comprehension in written form in an organized manner using text vocabulary and content are the greatest areas of difficulty for our subgroup of ELLs. • Title III funds will be dedicated for intervention, enrichment, and supplementary activities to facilitate additional instructional time through an after school program. • The focus of the after school program for newcomer, Intermediate and advanced students in grades 2, 3, 4 and 5, will be to provide additional opportunities for ELL students. Former ELL students will also be served in this program (as a transitional service). The focus for all students will be to practice and master those skills needed to prepare for the NYS ELA and Math exams as well as the NYSESLAT for current ELLs. We will be focusing on the writing strategies and reading comprehension strategies /skills needed to perform on the aforementioned assessments, with the added benefit of a focus on the content (vocabulary/background knowledge/ideas) used within the Ready Gen Program and Go Math program we have at our school. •Schedule and Duration: The program will begin November 1st, 2018 and end March 28th, 2019. Sessions will be Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 to 3:30 with 1 hour of planning time built in each week for the ENL teacher to analyze data and make modifications to after school plans. This adds up to 60 hours total across the five month duration. • The ESL teacher will provide students with specific support for their language development in the areas of reading, writing, listening and speaking as well as support in mastery of rigorous mathematics standards. • One supervisor will oversee the program, as there is no other program going on at the school at that time. The supervisor will work 2.5 hours per week to supervise late dismissal and parent activities. • Students will be given both small group and individualized instruction. • Student data from the NYSESLAT, Fountas and Pinnell reading assesments, Ready Gen Benchmark and PBA results, and Go Math assessments as well as classroom assessments will be used to drive the instructional program. Computer aided instruction will also be incorporated, using non Title III funded programs, as an additional learning modality. These programs include: "Imagine Learning" and I Ready for ELA and Math. 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Per Diem for staff profesional development will be provided for 4 (days) at a total cost of $670.00. • Students will be assessed weekly and progress will be monitored, based on the focus of the mathematics, reading, and writing strategies and skills taught. Additionally, the NYSESLAT, NYS ELA and Math scores from the Spring 2018 administration will be reviewed to determine growth and/or weaknesses as compared to those students not participating in the program. Ready Gen, I Ready, and Go Math assessments, and Fountas and Pinnell progress monitoring done in class will also be monitored for student growth and needs . We will also be using Reader's Theater and the FOCUS Intervention program from Teacher Created Materials to enhance reading comprehension skills (especially in the areas of inference and the use of text evidence) and writing skills (specifically for preparation in essay writing and short response writing). We will also be using Ready Gen texts and leveled texts from the Flying Start to Reading series (by Okapi), and leveled text from Fountas and Pinnell intervention kits to enhance reading comprehension skills ((especially in the areas of inference and the use of text evidence) and writing skills (specifically for preparation in essay writing and short response writing). We will also be using Ready Math for grades 2, 3,4,and 5. Based on the data provided by the baseline reading and writing assessments done as part of the ready gen curriculum, skills where deficiencies existed for the chosen students were charted.These skills will be the skills we target and assess through accountable talk (in conversation) and in writing responses and multiple choice questions created by the teacher. All of these books will be purchased for use during the Title III program as supplementary resources. Beyond these purchased materials, graphic organizers, both teacher created and supplied by Ready Gen, will be used to scaffold instruction and copies will be provided using paper purchased for use during this Title III program. An attendance sheet will be kept each day. Parents will be notified of the program in the form of a notice which will be English on one side and their home language on the other. Home languages that the notice will be translated into Punjabi, Urdu, and Spanish. Copies of these notices will be maintained in the ENL records of the school (with the ENL teachers compliance binder). Data will be maintained on student's progress with the targeted reading and writing skills in a data sheet. And Lessons will be tweaked as needed based on the latest available data. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The professional development program embeds strategies needed and considerations to be made in supporting the success of English Language Learners. Staff will be given professional development to support their understanding of language needs shown in standard assessments, and the preparation of materials to meet these needs. Title III teachers will be required to 8  Part C: Professional Development participate in 14 hours of professional development to occur both during and after school hours, as needed. Some of these PDs will be at no cost to the title III allocation. These will occur once or twice a month as the schedule allows and the PDs are made available by the Borough field office. These sessions will be conducted by the Supervisor, or the Director of ELL Student Services and /or publishing companies of the newly acquired materials. Teachers will identify and create ongoing strategies that support the individualized learning needs of their students for academic proficiency and mastery in standards in the areas of mathematics, reading and writing. Topics to be covered in the professional development include assessment and progress monitoring, using data to modify lessons and make material accessible for ELLs, differentiation for ELLs and former ELLs at different proficiency levels based on NYSESLAT results, differentiation and scaffolding based on I Ready and Imagine Learning, Ready Gen assessments, Fountas and Pinnell Assessments, and Go Math assessment based on Item skill analysis, and implications of assessments for ELLs and former ELLs. The school provides weekly (Mondays 2:30-3:50 PM) professional development with speakers from the borough field support center or from within the school on engaging themselves and students successfully in the Common Core learning Standards for mathematics, reading, writing, listening and speaking. Topics will include but are not limited to: differentiation, RTI, project based learning, effective student grouping, and assessment. Often, one or a few staff members will turnkey information learned at other seminars attended (throughout the year).Specifically, the borough field support team will also be holding once monthly professional development sessions (half day or all day depending on the month) which will be attended by Ms. A Stack (ENL coordinator) and she will turnkey information on Monday PD time. Teachers of ELLs are provided with options for supporting their ELL students within the Ready Gen and Go Math programs. Each lesson provides an ELL intervention teachers should consider. The ELL teacher will also be attending Professional development provided by the borough field support center as they are announced. Finally, as online professional development is made available, both the ENL teacher and other staff within the building who take advantage of those opportunities, in the areas of differentiation/scaffolding, RTI, project based learning, effective student grouping, and assessment. Records of PDs that occur will be in the form of attendance sheets and agendas. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Parent workshops that identify and create useful strategies for home use, and reinforce identified skills needed for proficiency. These workshops will focus on understanding the ELA and Math curriculum, as well as the NYSESLAT assessment and the learning needs of their children. Introduction of common core learning standards will be reinforced during each session. The workshop presenters will be a team presentation by Parent Coordinator, ELL Specialist and Title III provider (A Mazzo) and supervisor. Workshops will be held ine Tuesday each month from 2:30-3:45 during the months of November, December, January, and February. Topics will include (but are not limited to): Resources to help your child with higher level math problems and concepts, Expectations of the ELA Common Core State Standards, and strategies to help your child become a better writer and reader. Agendas will be kept as well as attendance sheets for these parent workshops. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 11,200  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0  1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name The Ronald H Brown School Borough Queens School Number 155 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Gregory Jacobs Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Alissa Stack Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent tmary barton Assistant Principal Melody Lieb and Jason Koo Coach type here School Counselor Tasha Kurs Parent type here Parent Coordinator Doris Nesmith Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 2 Total number of ELLs 33 ELLs as share of total student population (%) %  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses several assessment tools to assess the early literacy skills of the ELLs. We use Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments and teacher created assessments. We also use Ready Gen baseline and unit assessments. This data informs the instructional plan by giving data student’s ability to decode as well as answer more literal comprehension questions and higher level inference questions with the support of text evidence. These assessments give information on students ability to answer questions orally and in writing. Furthermore these assessments give information on student strengths and weaknesses in written expression (in regards to narrative, opinion and informative writing as per common core expectations). These assessments currently indicate a need to focus on answering higher level inference questions with text evidence both verbally and in writing. These assessments also indicate a need to focus on editing and revision of writing pieces (more specifically the use of punctuation, capitalization, correct or grade appropriate spelling depending on the grade, transitional 3  words and phrases, and sentences that sound and look right). Finally, these assessments indicate a need to focus on decoding (letter sounds tapping, blending and segmenting), vocabulary development, and sight word knowledge for a smaller subset of students (beginner ELLs who tested at Entering and Emerging levels). 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Assessments are made available to teachers in the F and P room, and in the boxes provided to each classroom teacher. Copies of the Ready Gen assessments are provided. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of the ELLs by looking at gains in reading levels on the Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments, class work samples, teacher created assessments and teacher observations during lessons results (gains or drops) on unit and chapter tests in Ready Gen and Go Math, and the results of the NYSESLAT anually. The results of next years NYSESLAT will also eventually be used to judge student progress and achievement. We look at the results of the NYS ELA exam an math exam as well. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Data meetings are held monthly in grade level teams with administrators to review trends in data (results of assessments) and plan future interventions to support ELLs in areas of difficulty. The ENL teacher also meets with administration once a month the address any changes or supports that can be done in the ENL classroom to address areas of deficiency from the summative results. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The RTI framework we use incorperates a whole group core instruction that promotes oral language development that is necessarily rich in both language and content. In these learning environments, students have opportunities to learn about, study, and discuss the language of texts. They then use this text-based content learning in interactive experiences like labs, demonstrations, dramatic plays, and debates that promote academic conversation and knowledge building. Strategies that promote ELLs’ oral language development must be explicitly planned and incorporated throughout the school day. These strategies include, but are not limited to building background knowledge in several ways. They include starting with rich text and big ideas so students encounter and study abstract language and abstract concepts, and learn about the world. We also focus on previewing key concepts and challenging vocabulary, as well as reviewing students’ understanding of important points and when possible, drawing on and using students’ home languages. We also use close interactive reading aloud and frontload vocabulary, sentence structures, and concepts . Furthermore, the curriculum incorperates teachers asking open-ended questions along the way; engaging students in discussion and dialogue about a big idea in the text and including relevant multicultural literature as well as multicultural chants, songs, and poems that help to build phonemic awareness. Teachers also implement storytelling using wordless books and collaborative discussion and debate. School-wide, we devote instructional planning and time to student projects that are discussion-based, including oral presentations and debates. During discussions, we pose open-ended questions and keep the conversation going with role playing and rehearsed oral performance . The curriculum also includes multifaceted and intensive vocabulary instruction which has many parts. The parts include vocabulary learning strategies such as using visual cues, total physical response (TPR; i.e., physically acting out new terms), and realia and sentence transformations through guided dialogue. Furthermore, vocabulary learning strategies incorperate language frames for speaking and listening and jointly constructed extended writing. Speaking and writing is further supported for ELLs requiring support beyond whole group instruction in small groups or one on one as possible. This includes turn and talks to preview ideas to be written, using the vocabulary from word walls and vocabulary sheets. This vocabulary was previously reviewed in a book walk and discussion. Then they use sentence starters 4  or write independently the ideas they practiced in the turn and talk. One on one conferencing to correct errors is provided as needed. As part of Ready Gen and Go Math, we transition from whole group instruction to small group re-teach opportunities and then to one on one assistance if students still have difficulties with the concept or strategy being taught. Students in need of re-teach opportunities are identified during informal assessments such as turn and talks, whole group discussion, and journal activities . Re-teach sheets and enrich sheets are provided by Go Math and used on a daily bais in groupings. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use:The NYSESLAT , ELA state exam, Math State exam, Science state exam, NYSITELL state exam, F and P BOY, MOY and EOY results and Ready Gen baseline and unit assessments 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data meetings are held monthly in grade level teams with administrators to review trends in data (results of assessments) and plan future interventions to support ELLs in areas of difficulty. The ENL teacher also meets with administration once a month the address any changes or supports that can be done in the ENL classroom to address areas of deficiency from the summative results. The ENL teacher meets with the classroom teachers once a week to discuss any areas of deficiency identified by assessment results. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Groups are created in this way. Integrated ENL minutes are provided in heterogenous groups with one or two grade levels represented in each group (No more than 2 grades are represented in each group). Students are put in mixed grade and proficiency groups (no more than 2 grades represented in each group) for their 180 minutes of standalone ENL ( for beginner/entering students) or 90 minutes of standalone ENL ( for low intermediate/emerging students) . Please refer to question 2 a for the breakdown of service minutes for each level of ELLs. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/a We do not have such a program at this time. c. DL program. If applicable. N/a We do not have such a program at this time. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Those determined to be beginners/entering level ELLs are provided with 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Those determined to be Low intermediate/Emerging level ELLs are provided with 90 minutes of standalone ENL and 270 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Those determined to be Intermediate/Transitioning level ELLs are provided with 0 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes 5  of integrated ENL/ELA. Those determined to be Advanced/expanding level ELLs are provided with 0 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Those determined to be proficient/commanding level ELLs are provided with 0 minutes of standalone ENL and 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the standalone ENL program, there is a focus on the four modes of language acquisition listening , speaking, reading and writing. More specifically, in reading there is a focus on decoding and comprehension via questioning about the texts being read at their various levels and on various topics. A guided reading approach is used to foster both decoding and comprehension abilities for students in all grades at the beginner and low intermediate levels, especially those students in kindergarten, first and second grade. Incorperated in this guided reading is a writing component in which students are expected to compose the answers to higher order thinking questions using correct grammar, correct punctuation, correct or grade appropriate spelling, and correct capitalization and spacing. These skills (Checking CPRS to edit and revise, using RAPPS with Say Mean Matter and a 3 sentence summary for writing, X?O for multiple choice questions) are modeled an built up by the teacher using exemplar pieces, other student work, conferencing, checklists, rubrics, and turn and talk discussion. Speaking and listening is worked on through whole class and turn and talk discussion as well as teacher modeling and questioning. The integrated ENL program for the kindergarten , first, second, third, fourth, and fifth grade students include discussion and reading/writing projects and units involving readings on similar topics or in the same genres/text types as those they are reading in Ready Gen (the ELA curriculum) and writing assignments that align with the type of writing and expectations put forth by Ready Gen for the current or upcoming unit of study (opinion or informational writing). Rubrics from the Ready Gen program/any rubric being used in the ELA lessons are also used or modified to be use in the ENL program and students are both assessed by the teacher and self assess using the standards set forth in those rubrics. Elements of the SRSD method is utilized including exemplar pieces, cold writes, checklists and rubrics, self assessment, peer assessment, conferencing, and mnemonic devices. For those students in grades 3,4, and 5, the integrated ENL program also includes units of study on math topics being taught in class with th GO Math curriculum with a focus on using multiple strategies to solve single or multi step word problems and explaining the steps or explaining why the answer makes sense using a variety of math terminology. Modeling with exemplars, word walls, illustrated strategy lists , manipulatives, and constant repetition and connections from one lesson to the next help the students to improve their problem solving and explanation skills in math. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The Spanish Lab R is the assessment available to assess the students who have Spanish as their home language. It is administered at the beginning of their first year as an ELL. For students in the testing grades, the science state test and math state test are provided in the home language as made available by NYS and as needed. Beyond this, students for whom Spanish is the home language may be given a Spanish translation of the GO Math workbook and Spanish translations of the GO Math chapter assessments as needed. Students are otherwise assessed in English for reading and writing via the Ready Gen unit, beginning and end of year assessments and the Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Students benefit from a building up of background knowledge and a front loading of vocabulary. They benefit from visual cues in the form of video and picture cues and the use of manipulatives. We also provide graphic organizers, guiding questions, sentence starters, mini and full size charts, and word walls.Students will be invited to take part in various after 6  school programs including the Title III program for current and former ELLs. Teachers use turn and talks and whole group discussions as practice for reading and writing activities. Teachers use materials such as Time For Kids and other visual readings from Ready Gen to help students succeed. b. Similarly, Students who have been in the US less than three years benefit from a building up of background knowledge and a front loading of vocabulary. They benefit from visual cues in the form of video and picture cues and the use of manipulatives. We also provide graphic organizers, guiding questions, sentence starters, mini and full size charts, and word walls. They also especially benefit from hands on experiences and additional speaking opportunities. Testing accommodations will be provided as appropriate. Imagine learning is a computer program used to enhance English language development. ELLs take a pre-test in English or their home language in the case of students speaking a language available within the program. This is done to determine areas of difficulty in literacy and language and are provided with activities and tutorial in the areas of difficulty determined by the pre-test. As the student progresses along their individualized path on the program, the teacher is provided with reports on areas of student success and difficulty and this provides some of the data used to differentiate instruction within the classroom. ELLs are also given access to glossaries and picture dictionaries in their classroom and ESL classroom library. Furthermore, ELLs in the school for less than three years are provided with practice in speaking with a specific focus on basic interpersonal communication skills necessary for navigating through the school day with teachers and classmate in a comfortable safe way. Songs, and rhymes are used to aide beginner students. Teacher produced picture visuals as well as visuals from books are used to give language and vocabulary context. Word walls with illustrations and physical manipulatives are also used to reinforce vocabulary development, understanding, and usage. Letter and number strips are used to reinforce for newcomers the letter and number formation as well as the sounds associated with the letters. In addition, read alouds, think alouds, and discussion with fiction and non fiction big books, large editions of Time For Kids magazine, and individual copies of texts are used to reinforce higher order thinking skills and content comprehension. Teachers use turn and talks and whole group discussions as practice for reading and writing activities. Teachers use materials such as Time For Kids and other visual readings from Ready Gen to help students succeed. c. Students benefit from a building up of background knowledge and a front loading of vocabulary. They benefit from visual cues in the form of video and picture cues and the use of manipulatives. We also provide graphic organizers, guiding questions, sentence starters, mini and full size charts.Students will be invited to take part in various after school programs including the Title III program for current and former ELLs. Testing accommodations will be provided as appropriate. Teachers use turn and talks and whole group discussions as practice for reading and writing activities. Teachers use materials such as Time For Kids and other visual readings from Ready Gen to help students succeed. For ELLs receiving between four to six years of service, most typically reading comprehension and writing organization difficulties impede progress. Therefore, a variety of additional support is provided. The writing process involving brainstorming, drafting, revising, editing, and publishing enables more advanced to hone their writing skills. Specific attention is paid to the student's ability to compose a main idea and support it with key details and a conclusion. At the same time, they practice correct grammar, syntax, and standard usage. Visuals and illustrated word walls continue to be utilized to support vocabulary development and content understanding. Furthermore, there is an alignment of goals and tasks to common core requirements and ESL standards. Graphic organizers are utilized to help students organize and synthesise ideas in reading and writing. Pre, post and interim assessments are used to determine needs and judge progress. Deeper higher order thinking questions aligned with Bloom's taxonomy, ready Gen content, and state assessment wording/vocabulary are incorporated into discussions and writing and reading tasks. d. Students benefit from a building up of background knowledge and a front loading of vocabulary. They benefit from visual cues in the form of video and picture cues and the use of manipulatives. We also provide graphic organizers, guiding questions, sentence starters, mini and full size charts.Students will be invited to take part in various after school programs including the Title III program for current and former ELLs. Testing accommodations will be provided as appropriate. Teachers use turn and talks and whole group discussions as practice 7  for reading and writing activities. Teachers use materials such as Time For Kids and other visual readings from Ready Gen to help students succeed. Furthermore, For ELLs receiving six or more six years of service, most typically reading comprehension and writing organization difficulties impede progress. Therefore, a variety of additional support is provided. The writing process involving brainstorming, drafting, revising, editing, and publishing enables more advanced to hone their writing skills. Specific attention is paid to the student's ability to compose a main idea and support it with key details and a conclusion. At the same time, they practice correct grammar, syntax, and standard usage. Visuals and illustrated word walls continue to be utilized to support vocabulary development and content understanding. Furthermore, there is an alignment of goals and tasks to common core requirements and ESL standards. Graphic organizers are utilized to help students organize and synthesise ideas in reading and writing. Pre, post and interim assessments are used to determine needs and judge progress. Deeper higher order thinking questions aligned with Bloom's taxonomy, ready Gen content, and state assessment wording/vocabulary are incorporated into discussions and writing and reading tasks. e.These students also benefit from a building up of background knowledge and a front loading of vocabulary. They benefit from visual cues in the form of video and picture cues and the use of manipulatives. We also provide graphic organizers, guiding questions, sentence starters, mini and full size charts, and word walls.Students will be invited to take part in various after school programs including the Title III program for current and former ELLs. Teachers use turn and talks and whole group discussions as practice for reading and writing activities. Teachers use materials such as Time For Kids and other visual readings from Ready Gen to help students succeed. Testing accommodations will also be provided to those who have tested as proficient for up to 2 years after testing out of the ENL program. These students will also be provided with 90 minutes of Integrated ENL per week. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Leveled books, Time for kids on various levels (k/1, 2 nd , 3 rd -4 th , 5 th ) , SRSD (cold writes, exemplar pieces, checklists and mnemonic devices, word walls, sentence starters), Imagine Learning, peer tutoring , Learninga-z.com (RAZ kids, reading a-z, writing a-z, science a-z, vocabulary a-z), Checking CPRS to edit and revise, using RAPPS with Say Mean Matter for writing, X?O for multiple choice questions, 3 sentence summaries 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs are provided with every modification and service required by their IEP in addition to ENL methods and required minutes of service a week to assist them in academic success. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. English: *SRSD ( use of exemplars, cold writes, sentence starters, word walls, mnemonic devices, graphic organizers, color coding, visuals) Checking CPRS to edit and revise, using RAPPS with Say Mean Matter for writing, X?O for specially formulated voabulary multiple choice questions, 3 sentence summaries *RTI- Go Math: Reteach sheets , enrichment sheets, Ready Gen: Scaffolding handbook, graphic organizers Spanish: Go Math workbooks, word walls, assessments available in spanish as needed 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 8  Khan Academy (math) , www.learninga-z.com (readinga-z, writinga-z, sciencea-z, vocabularya-z), FOCUS Intervention by Teacher Created Materials 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all after school programs and programs offered during the school day. They are afforded equal access to the new and existing programs being utilized by the school such Time For Kids, Ready Gen and "Go Math". Scaffolding and RTI strategies are provided in Ready Gen and GO Math to ensure ELL access. They are also included in the use of the FOCUS Intervention (by Teacher Created Materials) program and Reading Rescue program being utilized by the school, in the classrooms and in the ESL classroom. The FOCUS intervention program focuses on English language development including work with reading comprehension skills, decoding skills and vocabulary development. It provides each student with individualized goals and activities based on their independent and instructional reading levels. Reading Rescue provides one on one instruction in decoding, reading comprehension, and vocabulary development to applicable students to improve their independent reading levels . The RAZ kids website (www.kidsa-z.com) has access to leveled books which can be read to them, or read by them. In this way it acts as a listening and reading activity. Then comprehension questions are available for students to answer after each text. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Here is a description of the instructional materials used to assist ELLs. Time For Kids magazine (and online resources from the accompanying tfk.com) is an excellent resource of leveled and rich texts in the content areas of science and social studies. It is provided to ELLs at all grade levels. We use these relevant, content rich tests in science and social studies and apply the higher order thinking questions we are working on. The students use th visuals and vocabulary taught in bold to delvelop vocabulary and ar expected to use text details to answer questions verbaly and in writing. Texts and questions from the F&P Intervention kits and FOCUS Intervention program by Teacher Created Materials in conjunction with texts from the OKAPI Flying start to Reading (Reading Rescue) Book collection are going to be used along side higher level writing and multiple choice vocabulary questions created by Ms. A Stack (ENL coordinator). This is being done in an effort to enhance and improve comprehension, general writing ability and test taking skills. In conjunction with may of the strategies listed above, these resources are expected to make a major impact. ELLs are also given access to glossaries and picture dictionaries in their classroom and ESL classroom library. Furthermore, graphic organizers, non fiction and fiction books with strong visual (picture) support, big books, and hands on manipulatives are provided to aide ELLs . Manipulatives may include cubes, counters, colors, figurines, models, and large pictures . Visual support is further provided through videos and accompanying pictures on Go Math (as well as the website- thinkcentral.com). Leveled books from reading a to z, RAZ kids, benchmark universe, and learnzillion.com, word walls, mini and larger charts detailing the steps to using the the aforementioned strategies (including SRSD, RAPPS with Say Mean Matter, CPSR, X?O, 3 sentence summaries, fact lists) and are also a major resource, especially for beginner and low intermediate level ELLs. Other computer programs include the use of I Ready which also does a pre assessment of literacy (reading) skills and guides the student through a series of activities that will develop their knowledge in areas of weakness. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 9  ENL Program: Letters are translated and sent home in the child/parent's home language as needed throughout the school year. Phone calls to home are also made with the assistance of a translator within the school as needed and possible. Tuesday afternoons is dedicated to parent communication. Parents may meet with the ENL or classroom teachers and as requested, a translator is provided. Official letters (entitlement, non entitlement, etc….) are sent home in the home language and English Homeworks are also sent home including books read and unread, questions and vocabulary discussed in class and sentence starters. This way parents can see what their children are learning and expected to do. These homeworks are translated as much as possible with the use of online translation. Afterschool notices also go out in home languages and english. We only have an ENL program at the current moment. We do not have a DL or TBE program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Yes, required services support, and resources correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. Materials are leveled and translated when possible and needed. Books at the students independent and instructional reading level are the focus of instruction for those students in grades kindergarten through second grade, as well as any upper grade students who are at the entering, emerging, or transitioning levels. Content and skills taught matches the content and skills being taught in their classroom, in the Ready Gen Curriculum, and in the GO Math curriculum with focus being put on the content and skills with which ELLS show the greater need for assistance. This need is determined by communication with their classroom teachers and a frequent review of assessment results. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building. Our ELLs are served in house by one ENL teacher. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We do not currently have a program to assist newly enrolled ELLs before te beginning of the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have a dual language program at the present time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers of ELLs are provided with options for supporting their ELL students within the Ready Gen and Go Math programs. Each lesson provides an ELL intervention teachers should consider. Weekly PDs are provided on Mondays (2:30-3:50PM) by in school staff as well as representatives of the borough field support center to support ENl and all other teachers on ways to 0  support ELLs. Topics will include but are not limited to: differentiation, RTI, project based learning, Reading Rescue strategies, effective student grouping, quality student interactions, effective writing strategies and assessment. PDs are planned by the PD committee on a monthly basis. The school provides weekly (Mondays 2:30-3:50 PM) professional development with speakers from the borough field support center or from within the school on engaging themselves and students successfully in the Common Core learning Standards for mathematics, reading, writing, listening and speaking. Often, one or a few staff members will turnkey information learned at other seminars attended (throughout the year) . As stated above, PDs are planned by the PD committee monthly. Attendance is taken at all meetings and attendance sheets and agendas are maintained by the AP and principal. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ESL teacher is available , on site, to turn key information to school staff after all district wide ELL meetings and to invite teachers into the ESL classroom for observations. The district wide professional developments are attended by the ENL teacher about once a month. The ESL teacher also shares ELL specific information and resources with the various grade level teachers during teacher team meetings an meetings during common prep time.The ESL teacher keeps records of meetings with teachers during which material was turn keyed regarding specific ELL students. Materials from all distrtict ELL meetings are retained by the ESL teacher in her files for future reference. Teachers of ELLs are provided with options for supporting their ELL students within the REady Gen and Go Math programs. Each lesson provides an ELL intervention teachers should consider. Weekly PDs are provided on Mondays (2:30-3:50PM) by in school staff as well as representatives of the borough field support center to support ENL and all other teachers on ways to support ELLs. Topics will include but are not limited to: differentiation, RTI, project based learning, effective student grouping, Reading Rescue strategies for decoding and comprehension and assessment. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? As mentioned in the question, ELL parents participate in an orientation meeting to become aware of the programs offered when their children are first entitled to ESL services as dictated by the parents responses to the HLIS. They are also invited to all DOE scheduled parent teacher conferences. Furthermore, Tuesday afternoons are dedicated to communication with parents. During these afternoons (either over the phone or in person meetings) from 2:30 to 3:40 parents are made aware of the student's goals, language development progress, NYSESLAT results, and language development needs. Student work is shown and explained. If a parent has any specific requests or concerns, the ENL and classroom teachers are available to discuss them on these Tuesday meeting times as well. In addition, all parents, including parents of ELLs are also invited to all parent workshops whose topics range from CPR, parenting, ELA and math test prep, nutrition, and Ready Set Read (a program which teaches parents about brain development, differing learning styles and reading strategies), early intervention, and finally reading, writing, and mathematics common core expectations. 1  Parents can see what reading expectations and goals their students are working on via the www.kidsa-z.com website. Parents are sent letters explaining their student's results on unit assessments in Ready Gen and Go Math regularly. Parents are also invited to all monthly Parent Association meetings and they are active as learning leaders who provide support to students and teachers inside and outside the classroom. Parents are also invited to events such as multi-cultural night, and Family Day. Fliers for all school, UFT sponsored, local, district or city wide parent conferences are sent out to parents so that they can be more informed and help their children better. The Parent Handbook is sent home and available at the school. Finally, there is a bulletin board at the entrance of the school which provides parents with lists of community events, a calendar of school events, the lunch menu, local or government job listings and any relevant meeting or conference information. Translation is provided at these meeting as needed, with the use of DOE translation services, and the use of teachers or paraprofessionals who speak Spanish, Haitan Creole, and French. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In addition, all parents, including parents of ELLs are also invited to all parent workshops whose topics range from CPR, parenting, ELA and math test prep, nutrition, and Ready Set Read (a program which teaches parents about brain development, differing learning styles and reading strategies), early interventon, and finally reading, writing, and mathematics common core expectations. Parents are also invited to all monthly Parent Association meetings and they are active as learning leaders who provide support to students and teachers inside and outside the classooom. Parents are also invited to events such as multi-cultural night, and Family Day. Fliers for all school, UFT sponcered, local, district or city wide parent conferences are sent out to parents so that they can be more informed and help their children better. The Parent Handbook is sent home and available at the school. Finally, there is a bulletin board at the entrance of the school which provides parents with lists of community events, a calander of school events, the lunch menu, local or government job listings and any relevant meeting or conference information. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Gregory Jacobs, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Ronald H Brown School DBN: 27Q155 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Gregory Jacobs Title Principal Melody Lieb Assistant Principal Doris Nesmith Parent Coordinator Alissa Stack ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Tasha Kurs School Counselor Mary Barton Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q155 School Name: The Ronald H Brown School Superintendent: Mary Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Doris Nemith Parent Coordinator Yes no * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents fill out the Home Language Identification Survey and indicate what languages the child speaks and understands, as well as in which language they would prefer communication to occur (written and verbal). Parents are furthermore interviewed by the ENL coordinator to confirm their home language selections. The blue cards also indicate such information, which parents will out and to which teachers of that student have constant access. At the parent orientation for newly enrolled students, parents are provided with ‘entitlement’ and ‘survey and selection’ letters in the appropriate languages. After viewing the DVD in the home languages of all parents 5  present and in English, all options are explained and discussed. Where possible, additional personnel provide translation. The language translation needs represented by the current group of ELL students includes Spanish, Urdu, Bengali,Hindi and Punjabi. Parents are informed of the NYSELAT and NYSITELL test results in translated letter appendices as provided on the DOE website. (within the first 5 days of school). Specifically, they are sent continued entitlement letters or non entitlement letters in english and their home language (providing the DOE has a letter available in their home language). These letters indicate what program their child will receive for the current school year. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Haitian Creole MOSSI NEPALI 01 2 1 .16 .32 0.16 1 2 1 English 554 89.94 544 15 42 0 2.44 6.82 0 17 43 6 Punjabi Spanish URDU 0.16 0.32 0.16 88.31 2.76 6.98 0.97 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A 6  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Lunch forms are provided in Spanish, Punjabi, Chinese,Hindi, and English at the beginning of the year. Lunch forms are available online. Lunch forms are provided upon registration. Invitiations to ELL parent orientation meetings (in September) and ELL after school programs (before the program commenses each year) are provided in English and the home language of the parents (including the languages of the current parents in the program as listed above). ELL parent orientation invitations are provided upon registration (within the first 10 days of registering) All other forms are translated for parents as needed. ELL afterschool program invititations are sent out around October, prior to the start of the Title III program. How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We avail ourselves of the DOE translation services , use paraprofessionals and teachers who are fluent in the parent's home languages, and use online translation websites as needed for day to day communication. For non covered languages we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word". We avail ourselves of the DOE translation services , use paraprofessionals and teachers who are fluent in the parent's home languages, and use online translation websites as needed for day to day communication. For non covered languages we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word". We avail ourselves of the DOE translation services , use paraprofessionals and teachers who are fluent in the parent's home languages, and use online translation websites as needed for day to day communication. For non covered languages we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word". 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 7  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Parent teacher conferences are held 4 times a year. This year, they will occur on Sept. 21, 2017, November 16, 2017, March 15, 2018 and May 17, 2018. Informal interactions, such as attendance teacher or guidance counselor calls to parents will take place on an as need basis.Tuesday afternoons from 2:30 to 3:45 are specially set aside for meetings and phone calls with parents as needed. Parent teacher conferences are held 4 times a year. This year, they will occur on Sept. 13, 2017, November, 2017, March , 2018 and May , 2018. How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We avail ourselves of the DOE translation services , use paraprofessionals and teachers who are fluent in the parent's home languages, and use online translation websites as needed for day to day communication. For non covered languages we will use over the phone DOE interpretation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Phone calls will be made by translators available. For non covered languages we will use over the phone DOE interpretation services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. CR A 663 will be shared at a Monday PD session in September , 2017 with the entire staff. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any: 8   Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school will fulfill parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services as per Section VII of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 by posting a welcome poster, distributing the Parents' Bill of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access, and by providing the Language ID Guide at the security desk and main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will view the parent survey to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. 9 
