 30Q166 School Name: P.S. 166 HENRY GRADSTEIN Principal: JESSICA GELLER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 166Q 343000010166 PreK – 5 School Number (DBN): 30Q166 33-09 35 th Ave, Long Island City, NY, 11106 718-786-6703 718-729-7443 Phone Number: Fax: Katherine TsimisGeorgiou kgeorgiou@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Jessica Geller KalliopiAlevriadis MaritzaBaqueiro Email Address: Parents’ Association President: update in September with new members SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Michelle Perr N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 30 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dr. Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens, NY, 11101 pcompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-391-8323 Phone Number: 718-391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) North Queens Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North LIC, NY 11101 lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jessica Geller KalliopiAlevriadis MaritzaBaqueiro Emily Carrus Nancy Torres Michelle Perr *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Brigitte Todd Fran DeJong Kathryn Reklis Anastasia Smith Jennifer Trizulino Olivia Ramirez LambriniMatsas Ingrid Nunez Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is for all children to reach their full potential and develop a lifelong love of learning. Section 4: CEP Overview By providing a quality education that supports standards-driven instruction for all students, we aim to also foster a positive self-image and cultural awareness. Through a variety of academic programs and services we prepare students for today's technological world. Our motto is Dream Big, Work Hard.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 166, The Henry Gradstein School, located in Long Island City, is an elementary school with approximately 1100 students from pre-kindergarten through grade 5. The diverse school population comprises 4% Black, 44% Hispanic, 22% White, and 27% Asian students. The student body includes 17% English language learners and 10% special education students. Boys account for 50% of the students enrolled and girls account for 50%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2016-2017 was 95%. The school supports all learners with classes including Gifted & Talented, Dual Language, ENL and Special Education. Within Special Education services are offered for 12:1, Integrated Co-Teaching, SETSS, and related services such as Speech, Physical Therapy, Occupational Therapy, Counseling, Adaptive Physical Education, and Vision Services. The school’s administration team is made up of a Principal and two Assistant Principals. There is also one Math coach. The school is also proud of its two art teachers, computer teacher, three physical education teachers, librarian, music teacher, science teacher and ENL providers. Currently the school provides literacy instruction utilizing Pearson’s ReadyGen program. For math, all teachers follow the Go Math! program that is provided via Houghton Mifflin. Student assessments are conducted utilizing the Fountas & Pinnell Just Right Levels, in addition to assessments that are available through the curriculum or created by teachers. These results are reviewed on a monthly basis during Data Inquiry Team meetings. We focus on vertical alignment of the varying departments, including Gifted & Talented, Dual Language, Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners. Inquiry meetings are facilitated by lead teachers and coaches. Once a month the grade leaders will meet with the administration to discuss school-based curriculum successes and issues. Partnerships have been forged with the school to provide after-school programs via the Jacob Riis Settlement House, Serious Fun, Girl Scouts. Additional partnerships have been created to provide enrichment opportunities via Physics Bus, Lincoln Center, Barnes & Noble, Junior Achievement, Kidspire, New York City Children’s Theater, Art House Astoria and others. The school’s parent coordinator provides monthly workshops on nutrition, the arts and more. In addition, she works with a parent to provide ELL classes for adult learners in our community. The school’s Parent-Teacher Association has worked hard to ensure fund-raising efforts through a magic show, auction, a plant sale, school pictures and others. They have an Enrichment Committee which is responsible for bringing programs such as Chess, Ballroom Dancing, and Architecture to all of our students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Teachers are encouraged to adapt or enhance the curriculum as necessary. Furthermore, teachers record conference notes and develop individual student goals. This data is then used to adapt curricula and meet the needs of all learners. Teachers use rubrics and/or actionable feedback in order to monitor student progress. We support our special populations through the following:  Gifted and Talented - Teachers compact the curriculum for the purposes of accelerating learning  Dual Language - Materials provided in both languages.  Special Education - Professional development provided on best practices for IEP development and implementation 0   English as a New Language - Support and professional development for teachers in order to meet the requirements outlined by CR-Part 154. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Regarding the Framework for Great Schools, progress was made in the following areas:  Effective School Leadership - While the administration consists of a principal and two assistant principals, several teachers and staff members took on leadership roles. For example, the math coach also functions as the Building Response Team Leader. Strong Family-Community Ties - A school website was created, as was an email distribution list. Both are used to convey important information to the community.  Key areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school year:  Rigorous Instruction - Based on a review of data in Advance, the school will emphasize Demonstrating Knowledge of Content and Pedagogy and Designing Coherent Instruction.  Teacher collaboration - Teachers will work together to enhance the Inquiry Process by focusing on three cycles that each address a problem of practice. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q166 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1075 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 43 44 16 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 36 30 16 16 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 69.0% % Attendance Rate 61.9% % Reduced Lunch 15.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 44.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 22.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.67 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 65.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 89% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 43 41 16 94.9% 7.1% 9.8% 3.4% 27.0% 3.3% 4 0% 8.6 66.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A comprehensive needs assessment aligned with the Framework for Great Schools that focused on the element Rigorous Instruction was conducted. Many sources were analyzed and summarized to determine the most significant trends. Most prominently, according to the most recent Quality Review, the school is proficient in ensuring engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to State Standards and/or content standards. Additionally, in ELA the school's level of proficiency has increased from 58% (2016) to 61% (2017). Over the last three years the school has improved over 27% in ELA proficiency. In Math, the school's level of proficiency has increased from 59% (2016) to 60% (2017). Based upon these findings, we will continue to implement ReadyGen and Go Math! curricula which provide students the organizational and study skills needed to succeed in and be prepared for their next grade level. Thus paving the road towards college and career readiness. We will also focus on phonics in the lower grades (K-2) where teachers will utilize resources from Open Court, Houghton Mifflin and Estrellita. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will implement instructional strategies that will result in a minimum of 92% of students in grades K-5 engaging in rigorous units of study in Math, with a focus on problem solving as measured by the end of chapter Go Math Assessments. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will participate in planning Common Core aligned curricula and units of study utilizing GoMath! in daily common prep periods. All Teachers September 2018 - June 2019. Teacher teams (Inquiry and Grade Level) will create and evaluate student assessments from the GoMath! curriculum at a minimum of a monthly basis. All Teachers September 2017 - June 2018. Administration, coaches and teachers will provide professional development to enhance teacher understanding of the GoMath! curriculum during Monday PLOs. All Teachers September 2018 - June 2019. Activities include:  Norming of the administration of standardized tests, including Performance Series  Using the ThinkCentral website (GoMath!) o Goal-setting for individual student needs Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners will be invited to participate in our Rise & Shine Morning program. SWDs and ELLs. Jan. 2019 - May 2019 Parents/guardians will be invited to volunteer and provide assistance in classrooms. Training and implementation will be ongoing throughout the school year. All parents/guardians Sept. 2018 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Coaches, Teacher teams (Grade Level, Grade Leaders, and Inquiry Teams), Administration. Coaches, Teacher teams (Grade Level, Grade Leaders, and Inquiry Teams), Administration. Administration, Coaches, FSC Personnel & Teachers will provide professional development on the use of problem solving strategies in the classroom Coaches, Teacher teams (Grade Level, Grade Leaders, and Inquiry Teams), Administration. Parent Coordinator 4  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Workshops will be provided by the Parent Coordinator and other relevant staff members on a monthly basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All teacher teams (Grade Level, Grade Leader, & Inquiry Teams) meet weekly to plan and revise units of study. All teacher teams (Grade Level, Grade Leader, & Inquiry Teams) will also meet monthly to plan and revise units of study based on student assessments. Weekly professional development will be provided on Monday afternoons as per the Chancellor’s initiative. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, teachers and coaches will have successfully designed and implemented at least three rigorous CCLS-aligned units of study for the Go Math! curriculum. By February 2019, at least two of these units will be completed as measured by a review of class data sheets. Administration and coaches will attend grade meetings to monitor progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Completion of performance-based assessments and end-of-unit Math tests. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We conducted a comprehensive needs assessment aligned with the Framework for Great Schools that focused on the element Supportive Environment. It was then determined that the school needs to focus on Social/Emotional Learning (SEL). For example, the most recent School Quality Guide reports that 82% of teachers say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities. Students and staff will be prepared to understand, empathize and appreciate each other, therefore improving student outcomes. Based upon these findings, our Power Brain mentors and school leaders will provide professional development in order to assist in creating a supportive environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will implement SEL strategies as part of their daily classroom routines. that will result in a minimum of 90% of teachers in all grades achieving Effective or Highly Effective in component 2a - Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport as measured by the Danielson Rubric. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will participate in professional development as provided by coaches, teachers and administrators All teachers during Monday PLOs. Teachers will participate in focused intra-visitations as led by coaches, teachers and administrators on a monthly basis. All teachers September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Teacher teams (Inquiry and Grade level) will meet to discuss best practices in creating equity of learning opportunities on a monthly basis. All teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Parents/guardians will be invited to volunteer and provide assistance in classrooms. Training and implementation will be ongoing throughout the school year. All parents/guardians September 2018 - June 2019 Power Brain Mentors & Staff, Coaches, Teacher teams (Grade Level, Grade Leaders, and Inquiry Teams), Administration. Coaches, Teacher teams (Grade Level, Grade Leaders, and Inquiry Teams), Administration. Coaches, Teacher teams (Grade Level, Grade Leaders, and Inquiry Teams), Administration. Parent Coordinators N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Workshops will be provided by the Parent Coordinator and other relevant staff members on a monthly basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7  All teacher teams (Grade Level, Grade Leader, & Inquiry Teams) meet monthly to discuss and review intra-visitations focused on Social/Emotional Learning. Discussions will focus on best practices in this areas. Weekly professional development will be provided on Monday afternoons as per the Chancellor’s initiative. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 80% of teachers in all grades will have achieved an Effective or Highly Effective rating in the component 2a - Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport as measured by the Danielson Rubric and monitored through data analysis of the Advance Web Application. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Review of Advance Web Application Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A comprehensive needs assessment aligned with the Framework for Great Schools that focused on the element Collaborative Teachers was conducted. According to the most recent Quality Review, the school is well developed in engaging in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning. Additionally, a review of the NYC School Survey indicated that only 68% of teachers feel that teachers are eager to try new ideas. Based upon these findings, we will continue to focus on collaboration improving the Inquiry Process. For example, each Inquiry Team will focus on three cycles over the course of the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school administrators and coaches will facilitate the inquiry process. This will result in at least 92% of teachers participating in collaborative inquiry work at least once a month, as measured by agendas, summary notes, observations, and student work. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams (Dual Language, Special Education, ENL, etc.) will meet to participate in planning Common Core aligned curricula and units of study utilizing ReadyGen and GoMath!. All Teachers Activities will include: Teacher teams (Grade Level, Grade Leaders, and Inquiry Teams), Administration and Coaches. Inquiry teams will meet at least once a month from September 2018 - June 2019, while common preps occur daily. Item Skills Analysis  Review of student data sheets   Analysis of Fountas & Pinnell data   Applied use of ThinkCentral website Study Performance Based Assessments Teacher teams (Inquiry and Grade Level focusing on Dual Language, Special Education, ENL, etc.) will evaluate student assessments from the ReadyGen and GoMath! units. All Teachers Activities will include: Teacher teams (Grade Level, Grade Leaders, and Inquiry Teams), Administration and Coaches. Inquiry teams will meet twice a month from September 2018 - June 2019, while common preps occur daily. Item Skills Analysis  Review of student data sheets   Analysis of Fountas & Pinnell data   Applied use of ThinkCentral website Study Performance Based Assessments Facilitators will lead teacher teams (Dual Language, Special Education, ENL, etc.) in inquiry work from the ReadyGen and GoMath! units. All Teachers Inquiry teams will meet twice a month from September 2018 - June 2019, in addition to Teacher teams (Grade Level, Grade Leaders, and Inquiry Teams), Administration and Coaches. 0 Activities will include: Item Skills Analysis  Review of student data sheets   Analysis of Fountas & Pinnell data   Applied use of ThinkCentral website Study Performance Based Assessments sharing findings with administration. Parents/guardians will be invited to volunteer and provide assistance in classrooms. Training and implementation will be ongoing throughout the school year. All parents/guardians September 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Workshops will be provided by the Parent Coordinator and other relevant staff members on a monthly basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All teacher teams (Grade Level, Grade Leader, & Inquiry Teams) meet weekly to plan and revise units of study. In addition, all teacher teams (Grade Level, Grade Leader, & Inquiry Teams) meet at least once per month to plan and revise units of study based on student assessments, in addition to sharing findings with administration. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers and coaches will have participated in at least five collaborative inquiry work meetings, as measured by a review of agendas and attendance sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas, summary notes, observations, and student work. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A comprehensive needs assessment aligned with the Framework for Great Schools that focused on the element Effective School Leadership was conducted. After careful review of soft-data, administrative observations and the NYCDOE School Environment Survey, the school needs to focus on building capacity of staff to establish trust and a positive, productive work environment. Specifically, only 86% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that teachers respect other teachers who take the lead in school improvement efforts. Based upon these findings, we will continue to promote effective school leadership. We will empower individuals to take a more active role in the school-wide decision making process. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school administration will implement distributive leadership strategies that will result in at least 25% of the staff taking active leadership roles. This will be achieved through participation in any of the following areas: committees/teams, inquiry facilitation, teacher mentors, professional development, school operations and curriculum/instruction. A review of attendance sheets and agendas from these meetings and committees will be used to determine what percentage of staff members took on leadership roles in these specified areas. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Each grade will be assigned a Grade Leader. In addition, we have a Math Coach and an IEP teacher. The administration will meet with these individuals at least monthly to discuss progress. Coach, coordinators and selected teachers Teachers will provide professional development on Monday afternoons as per the Chancellor’s initiative. All teachers Topics will include, but are not limited to the following: IEP development and implementation  ENL   ThinkCentral for GoMath!  Use of technology (ENO Boards) Computer teacher will serve as technology coordinator and troubleshoot issues throughout the school on a weekly basis. All teachers Grade leaders will facilitate monthly grade meetings All teachers Parents/guardians will be invited to volunteer and provide assistance in classrooms. Training and implementation will be ongoing throughout the school year. All parents/guardians Ongoing from September 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing from September 2018 - June 2019 Administration and Coach Teacher teams (Grade Level, Grade Leaders, and Inquiry Teams), Administration and Coach. Administration and computer teacher Teacher teams (Grade Level, Grade Leaders, and Inquiry Teams), Administration and Coaches. Parent Coordinator Ongoing from September 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing from September 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing from September 2018 - June 2019 3  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Workshops will be provided by the Parent Coordinator and other relevant staff members on a monthly basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The cabinet team will meet once a week for planning and analysis to review progress with active leadership roles. Administration will meet with key stakeholders at minimum once a month. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers and coaches will have successfully participated in at least three instances where they demonstrated a leadership role. They will conduct meetings and/or provide staff-wide professional development, as evidenced by a review of agendas and attendance sheets related to these areas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas, summary notes, observations, and student work. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A comprehensive needs assessment aligned with the Framework for Great Schools that focused on the element Strong Family and Community Ties was conducted. Many sources were analyzed and summarized to determine the most significant trends. Most prominently, after careful review of the School Quality Snapshot, only 87% of parents agreed that they were invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction. Based upon these findings, teachers will be required to invite parents into their classrooms a minimum of two times during the school year, with the emphasis being on the observation of instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 90% of parents will indicate that they were invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction as measured by the School Quality Snapshot. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent engagement time will occur on a weekly basis using the Chancellor's initiative of Tuesday afternoons. Teachers and parents Professional development will be provided on selected Monday afternoons to engage teachers in best practices for communicating with parents/families regarding student learning and inviting parents into the classrooms. Teachers and parents Student progress reports will be sent to the families, indicating areas of strength, as well as those for improvement at least once per month. Teachers and parents Parents/guardians of SWDs and ENLs will be invited to monthly workshops provided by Parent Coordinator. Parents/guardians of SWDs and ENLs Teachers, Administration and Coaches. Teachers, Administration and Coaches. Teachers Parent Coordinator Ongoing from September 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing from September 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing from September 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing from September 2018 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Serious Fun, Jacob Riis Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All teacher teams (Grade Level, Grade Leader, & Inquiry Teams) meet weekly to plan and revise student progress reports as well as discuss plans focused on parent engagement. Weekly professional development will be provided on Monday afternoons as per the Chancellor’s initiative. 6  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will have invited parents (at least one time) into their classrooms to observe instruction as measured by parent sign-in sheets and PCAR data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas, summary notes, observations, administrative walkthroughs to review parent engagement data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group or individual instruction The services are provided during the regular school day. Small group or individual instruction The services are provided during the regular school day. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Bottom 10% of students throughout the school. Mathematics Bottom 10% of students throughout the school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Comprehension skills are addressed through the implementation of small group and individualized instruction. Techniques are used to work on children’s specific comprehension needs in order to increase their knowledge base in all subject areas. In addition, we utilize Wilson, RTI, and the push-in model during the school day to address students’ specific weaknesses incomprehension. Math skills and concepts are reinforced daily through the use of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Go Math Skills. Teachers work with small groups to reinforce skills, strategies, concepts, terminology and problem solving strategies during the school day. 8 Small group or individual instruction The services are provided during the regular school day. Fourth grade students receive AIS on a weekly basis. Lessons and activities emphasize scientific method and content reading during the school day. Students receive AIS in the content area. Science Bottom 10% of students throughout the school. Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Bottom 10% of students throughout the school. As determined by school’s PPT/AIS Team. Small group or individual instruction Social skills, community service to build leadership skills, build self-esteem Small group or one-to-one The services are provided during the regular school day. The services are provided during the regular school day. 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Six 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. On an as-needed basis, we will provide at-risk counseling, social/peer interaction groups, after-school programs, school supplies, clothing, MetroCards, contact with outside agencies for additional supports. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  Not applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not applicable 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Professional development will be provided to all teachers to keep them highly qualified through the Danielson Framework. ● A comprehensive, professional library is maintained, providing teachers with necessary resources. ● Teachers are regularly given the opportunity to attend professional development which is shared with the rest of the staff. ● Mentors are assigned to support new teachers. ● Buddy teachers provide support for staff new to a grade. ● Data Inquiry Teams meet at least once per month to share best practices and look at student work. ● Based on administrative observation of teachers strengths, staff members are chosen to provide rigorous Professional Development in a noted area of expertise. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The FSC offers regular Professional Development Institutes. Anyone who would like to attend is encouraged to register. Information is later turn-keyed at Grade Conferences, Inquiry meetings, and at Administrative Cabinet meetings. This information is shared with all staff at Faculty Conferences and Professional Development Workshops. Additionally, teachers will be provided the opportunity to attend differentiated Professional Development specific to their area of need/interest. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 2  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). In order to assist preschool children with the transition from the early childhood program to the elementary school program, the Pre-K curriculum is aligned with the New York State Standards. Examples include: ● Approaches to Learning - the teachers help build foundational skills such as engagement, creativity, imagination, curiosity, and initiative ● Physical Development and Health - exercise and movement are incorporated throughout the school day. ● Social and Emotional Development - the teachers help the students build relationships with others, become self-aware, and learn how to adapt in situations. ● Communication/Language/Literacy - The teachers help the students build background knowledge, learn new vocabulary, and be motivated. In the areas of ELA/Literacy key ideas and details are taught while integrating phonological awareness. ● Cognition and Knowledge of the World - The students learn how to solve mathematical problems, study geometry, and learn how to count The Pre-K teachers receive professional development provided by the District four times a year. The bilingual Parent Coordinator offers workshops to parents during the year. The two Pre-K teachers work together to plan and create assemblies and extra curricular activities. The Pre-K Social Worker is on site once a week to support the children and families in meeting the new standards. The school also hosts Open Houses for future Kindergarten students and families. This provides an opportunity for families to become familiar with the school while also networking with fellow community members. Additionally, PS 166 allows the parents of new Kindergarten students to bring their children directly to the classroom on each of the first two days of the school year, thus easing the transition process for the children and families. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 3  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A committee was formed to help decide the Measures of Student Learning, (MoSL) and Professional Development. Both the UFT Chapter Leader and the Principal selected individuals to participate on both committees. The team members met to decide which assessments to use. Information is shared at Faculty Conferences, Grade Conferences, and at Inquiry meetings. Results of assessments are discussed and best practices are shared to help improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 412,827 52,127 21,070 0 5,512,068 X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B,5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B,5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B,5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B,5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 4  which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 166Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 166Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 7  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 166Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 8  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 9  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 0  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 1  ● always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The total student population is 1044 of which 15.8% are English Language Learners. Our school provides standardized and consistent high-quality instruction for those participating in the ENL and Dual Language Programs. Currently our school has 6 free-standing ENL classes in grades K-5 and 13 Dual Language classes in grades K-5. These programs are designed in accordance with CR- Part 154 and the Title III guidelines. The placement of the above students is based on the results of the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores. ELL students who scored at the entering and emerging levels receive 360 minutes of ENL per week. Students who scored at the Transitioning and Expanding levels receive 180 minutes of ENL and 180 minutes of ELA weekly. Students who are Commanding receive 90 minutes of ENL services. Certified and highly qualified ENL and bilingual teachers service all of our ELL students. For this school year, we will have a before school program to provide extra support to our ELL students. Our 2018-2019 Title III program will take place before school for grades first through fifth. The program will service this year's ENL students. All ELL students in these grades will be invited to participate and classes will be designed to meet the needs of the students on each grade level. We letters will me backpacked home in the family's home language, informing them of the dates, times and expectations of the program. We will have eight certified ENL or Bilingual teachers that will work with these students. There will be at least eight classes with approximately 15 students in each room. The language of instruction will be English. Each teacher will have a folder with the class attendance. They will document who is present/absent. They will also have family contact information to keep records of communication about the students progress in the program. The instructional strategies that are being implemented to help our ELL students meet the Common Core Learning Standards: • The teachers will provide a supplemental service that goes beyond the ELL mandates of the school day. Not only will students receive their required ELL services, but through the use of technology and other materials they also improve their literacy and math skills using a multi-lingual approach. • ELL Interim Assessments, NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, ELA, and HLA are all used to identify the needs of individual students. • Reading and writing workshop model • Using ENL methodologies such as TPR, modeling, and visuals, along with technology and exposure to different forms of literature to yield cross-cultural knowledge and understanding. • AIS services where small group instruction is provided to help students who need additional help. • Teachers will focus on weaknesses and build on strengths through 1-to-1 tutoring, small-group instruction, or whole-group instruction. The materials used will be supplemental and distinct from those used for daily instruction. 4  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: We have implemented the Ready Gen curriculum, and teachers were provided with professional development. All our DL classes are using the Ready Gen Bi-literacy Pathways program. This component will be at no cost to the program. PD will be done by our own teachers who have/will go to PD and then turnkey the information to groups of teachers and/or to the whole staff. We also have a Literacy coach assigned to our school who works with our staff during the PD Mondays along with pushing into classrooms to support teachers. Teachers are encouraged to sign up for the professional development over the summer. All our classroom teachers, math coach and ENL teachers will have the opportunity to participate in workshops that will provide them with strategies to achieve success. These workshops will be scheduled for Mondays during Professional Development time. At least once a month the teachers will meet with their department, for example, ENL, DL, SWD etc. Teachers will also meet on their grade levels. Technology workshops have been provided to assist teachers with Apps and websites that will assist them with the students in their class. Our math coach is available to meet with out DL/ENL teachers throughout the day in regards to online programs or websites where they can differentiate their instruction to meet the students' needs. Agendas and sign-in sheets from each PD are kept on file in the Main Office. These PD sessions will positively impact our ELLs because our staff will be trained in a variety of ways to be able to teach to each learning style. The ongoing professional development allows teachers to build on what they are learning and apply it to their teaching. The PD provides them with opportunities to learn something new or improve on what they are doing already. Aside from workshops that teachers will sign up for outside of school, our staff will have in-house workshops, professional development sessions and meetings on the following days: Monday, September 17 and 24 Monday, October 1, 15, 22, and 29 Monday, November 5, 19, and 26 Monday, December 3, 10, and 17 Monday, January 7, 14, and 28 Monday, February 4, 11, and 25 Monday, March 4, 11, 18, and 25 Monday, April 1, 8, 15, 29 Monday, May 6, 13, 20 Monday, June 3, 10, 17 and 24 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 5  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: The Parent Coordinator is the link between the parents and the school community. She familiarizes the parents with the immediate community and informs them of resources such as local doctors, health care institutions, legal services, and any other services which may be needed by parents, such as immigration, citizenship, housing, food stamps, etc. The Parent Coordinator, conducts ENL classes for the parents weekly. She incorporates activities such as crocheting or Arts and Crafts so that parents experience a variety of activities and learn language skills needed for completing these activities. The Parent Coordinator also trains the parents to access the DOE website, student accounts and Family Income Inquiry Forms. The Parent Coordinator assists the coaches in offering math and literacy workshops throughout the year. These workshops inform parents of math and reading programs in the building. In addition, the workshops teach parents how to help their children improve math and literacy skills at home. Additionally, the Parent Coordinator organizes and provides workshops with the help of outside agencies on topics ranging from nutrition, health, assessments and information on how parents can help their children succeed. To assist newly enrolled ELL students, we begin by establishing a good working relationship with the parents, empowering them with as much knowledge as we can about their child’s education so that they can take on an active role in their child’s learning experiences. Some of the outside agencies include: • Health Plus: Informs parents about free or low-cost medical coverage for children and offers enrollment for those parents who have no health coverage. • Mount Sinai Hospital of Queens: Conducts several workshops at the school during the school year on various topics dealing with children, adolescents, and health. In addition, they send flyers to inform the parents of community workshops that are scheduled at the hospital in their “Community Room.” Topics include health, nutrition, aerobics, etc. The hospital also offers free screening for high blood pressure, cancer and diabetes. • Cornell University: Offers a 6-week nutrition program to the parents to teach them how to budget, shop wisely, and prepare healthy meals for their families. During these sessions, parents participate in hands-on activities where they actually prepare healthy nutritious meals. Upon completion of the six-week program, parents receive a certificate from Cornell which can be used towards employment in the food business. • EPIC (Every Person Influences Children): Provides workshops based on parents’ needs. Members of the organization teach parents how to set goals for themselves and for their children, addressing issues such as adolescence, children with special needs, and sexual abuse. Parents receive a three full-day training session at EPIC’s home base, I.S. 204 in Long Island City. Workshops then follow at P.S. 166 to address parents’ needs. • Dial-A-Teacher: A service provided by the U.F.T. that allows parents to call in for homework help for their children. The service is available Monday-Thursday from 4:00 – 7:00 p.m. in ten languages. • Cultural enhancements: Museums such as the Metropolitan, Brooklyn Children’s, Noguchi, and Socrates Sculpture Park come to P.S. 166 to provide parents with cultural resources, as well as free activities available for children. 6  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities • DELLSS: Offers workshops for ELL parents. These workshops are conducted in a variety of languages and parents are provided with information to support them with their child's education. The Parent Coordinator informs families and assists them when needed. • Variety Boys & Girls Club of Queens: Sends representatives to P.S. 166 to speak about the many programs available such as: swimming, drama, art, reading, group/learning centers, and computer classes. In the Spring, there is an orientation for parents of incoming Kindergarten students. The administration explains the HLIS forms, NYSITELL and NYSESLAT testing to the parents and informs them of the various programs that are available for all students. ENL, Bilingual, and Dual Language programs are explained so that parents make informed decisions about where they want their child placed. In the Fall, the Dual Language/ENL Coordinator conducts an orientation for parents of newly-admitted students. The coordinator explains the programs available in the school for all children. Parents of ELL students are informed and given the opportunity to select an ENL, Bilingual or Dual Language program. They also learn how differentiated instruction and small group instruction are used to meet children’s needs, and how support staff such as ENL teachers can support this type of instruction. These meetings are not at cost to Title III. Parents of the newly enrolled students are also invited to attend workshops presented by the service providers of P.S. 166. The service providers inform parents of the various services their children are entitled to in order to address any special needs they may have. The Parent Coordinator assists in the above-mentioned workshops and also coordinates other workshops to inform the parents of services and resources in the community that are available to them and their families.To keep parents abreast of the different programs within our school, P.S. 166 provides parents of ELL students with at least three parent orientation meetings during the year. The Fall orientation is to inform parents of the programs available for ELL’s such as Transitional bilingual, Freestanding English as a Second Language, and Dual Language. The Winter and Spring orientations focus on informing parents of the different tests, assessments and their implications. During these orientations translators, of different community languages, are present. All communication is done via email or letters/agendas are sent home in parents' preferred languages. Our Parent Coordinator keeps electronic and hard copies of all the workshops/events that take place in our building. She keeps the hard copies of all the invitations, agendas and sign-in sheets filed in the Main Office. Our school also uses the Over-the-phone Interpretation services when needed. If we have events at school we request of an interpreter or we have parent/community volunteers who assist the families that need this service. Most importantly our school website is the best resource for our families because everything is accessible to them there including translated documents. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 7  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name The Henry Gradstein Borough Queens School Number 166 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jessica Geller Coach Kari Seitz ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Tina Tomais Teacher/Subject Area Anastasia Smith Teacher/Subject Area Penelopi Kikis Related-Service Provider Valerie McGuckin Superintendent Dr, Phillip Composto Assistant Principal Katherine Tsimis Georgiou Coach Kari Seitz School Counselor Janis Soper Parent Maritza Baqueiro Parent Coordinator Milagros Diaz Field Support Center Staff Member Nancy DiMaggio Other (Name and Title) Laurie Robilotto C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 12 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 6 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 3 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1044 9 Total number of ELLs 165 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.80%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 3 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 2 2 0 2 2 3 0 2 2 4 0 2 2 5 0 2 2 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 13 0 0 13 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teacher teams (Dual Language, Special Education, ENL, etc.) will meet to participate in planning Common Core aligned curricula and units of study utilizing ReadyGen and GoMath!.Activities will include:Applied use of ThinkCentral website-LAB-R, NYSESLAT, ELA, and HLA are all used to identify the needs of individual students.-AIS services where small group instruction is provided to help students who need additional help. -Other authorized ENL activities such as trips, multicultural shows, interview, speeches, international lunches and exposure to literature will be developed to enhance and broaden students' knowledge.Success Maker, a technology-based program is used to increase language skills, in both English and Spanish, by providing students with regular individualized instruction in reading and math. Used in conjunction with lessons on the Smart Board, the program reinforces reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills. Data reports, from the program, are used as assessments and provide teachers with necessary data for differentiating instruction.-Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark assessment to determine students' Just Right Levels. -The lower grades have started to incorporate the Estrellita Spanish Literacy Program which focuses on blending, fluency and reading comprehension. Using ENL methodologies such as TPR, 0  modeling, and visuals, along with technology and exposure to different forms of literature to yield cross-cultural knowledge and understanding.-RubricsVillage Academies Leveled Reading Assessments for the upper gradesPre/Post assessments for all grade levels Performance Series for grades 3-5 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Schedules are provided early on in the year to inform teachers of assessment periods. Training is provided in house or in district to provide support to teachers who need it. The teachers on each grade have a common planning period, where they can design lessons according the the standards. The teachers also meet by department to compare glows and grows. Teachers meet on a regular basis to discuss, plan and implement the Four Hallmarks of Advanced Literacy Instruction. During these meetings, teachers compare and contrast student work and focus on how to adjust their teaching and design lessons to meet the needs of all the students in their classrooms. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to continue providing a quality education to all our ELLs, we utilize our coach to offer rigorous classroom instruction. Our ENL push-in/pull-out program also assists teachers with implementing different strategies and activities to ensure that the children are being taught in an environment where they are allowed to explore, discover and feel comfortable having discussions in both languages. Common prep time for Dual Language teachers to plan collaboratively is provided. In addition, we have periodic grade meetings and study groups where teachers meet to plan and discuss instructional practices as well as the latest studies on language acquisition. Since the teachers have the opportunity to meet and discuss new findings, data, assessments, and lesson planning our programs are proved to be more successful. All teachers involved make a great contribution to each child's educational plan. This teamwork assists the students with the right amount of support. The strategies and skills that the children are learning in these programs have assisted in making gains on the NYSESLAT, in addition to evidence in the work the students produce and the project-based activities that they work on. Just Right Levels and Performance Tasks are used to measure progress and areas of need. Teachers also look at the Item Skills Analysis to provide support where needed. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers keep running records of student progress. Rubrics and checklist are used to provide students with the necessary information to complete a task. Students are aware of their goals and what needs to be done to achieve them. Teachers begin with the students' Just Right Levels from the previous year and assess the children in Fall and Spring to measure growth. Low-inference conference data is also provided by each teacher. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] PS166 has a curriculum that is aligned to the NYS learning standards and classroom teachers continuously use a tiered system of instructional support to cater to each students' needs. Levels of intervention and instruction increase in duration and intensity over time; if and when there is improvement, the proper assessments are used to determine removing the extra support. The bottom 10% of our students receive AIS as follows:Comprehension skills are addressed through the implementation of small group and individualized instruction. Techniques are used to work on children’s specific comprehension needs in order to increase their knowledge base in all subject areas. In addition, we utilize Wilson, RTI, and the push-in model during the school day to address students’ specific weaknesses incomprehension.Math skills and concepts are reinforced daily through the use of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Go Math Skills. Teachers work with small groups to reinforce skills, strategies, concepts, terminology and problem solving strategies during the school day. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Each year, we analyze the results of the NYSESLAT by looking in ATS. ATS reports such as RMSR and RLAT are studied and disaggregated to ensure that all of our students are receiving appropriate services. In addition, we look at RELC in ATS to guarantee that all ELL students are administered the NYSESLAT. The Testing Coordinator is responsible for facilitating all four 1  components of the NYSESLAT. She meets with administration to create a schedule that will allow the appropriate time for each students to take the test in its entirety. The coordinator works with other ENL certified teachers to administer all four components of the test. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? During data inquiry meetings, student work is analyzed and discussed. Plans are then made on how to improve practice and instruction to cater to students' needs. For instance, comprehension skills are addressed through the implementation of small group and individualized instruction. Techniques are used to work on children’s specific comprehension needs in order to increase their knowledge base in all subject areas. In addition, we utilize Wilson, RTI, and the push-in model during the school day to address students’ specific weaknesses in comprehension. Math skills and concepts are reinforced daily through the use of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Go Math Skills. Teachers work with small groups to reinforce skills, strategies, concepts, terminology and problem solving strategies during the school day. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In this program we emphasize English acquisition through the use of ENL strategies, methodologies and techniques such as visuals, repetition, TPR, and graphic organizers. Our goal is to assist students to achieve the state designated level of English proficiency for their grade and to help ELLs meet or exceed New York State Standards. Our students are grouped heterogeneously in a block class. According to the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and the Exam History Report information we are able to provide the students with the correct number of minutes necessary to meet the CR Part 154.2 requirements. b. TBE program. If applicable. At this time we do not have a Transitional Bilingual Education program. c. DL program. If applicable. Our Dual Language program is a developmental, heterogeneous, language-enriched bilingual education program that integrates native English speakers with native speakers of Spanish for all of the content area instruction. All students in our Dual Language program develop their second-language skills while learning content knowledge in both languages. Both groups provide good linguistic models for each other and, through their interactions, support language development in both languages. Students are expected to build academic skills in their first language and eventually transfer these skills to the second language. ELL and English proficient students are linguistically integrated for all content area instruction in all grades. In our self-contained class, there is one teacher who provides instruction in both English and Spanish. In our side-by-side configuration, there are two classes that receive instruction from two teachers. The two teachers plan all instruction together in order to meet the academic and linguistic objectives of all the students. Instruction in reading, writing, math, science, and Social Studies is delivered in both English and Spanish every other day. In grades K-5, students follow the Alternating Day Variant of 50:50 Model which involves two teachers, two linguistically integrated classes, and two separate classrooms. In 4th grade the Dual Language classroom will follow the Alternating Day Variant of 50:50 Model. The classroom is divided into two sections, one for English, color-coded in blue and the other in Spanish, color-coded in red. In this program, students will build upon academic skills in their first language and eventually transfer these skills to the second language. Language Arts is taught using NLA, ENL, and ELA strategies. Content area subjects are taught in both English and Spanish, using second language acquisition strategies, and the target language. The classroom environment is designed to represent the Teacher’s College workshop model and balanced literacy in the daily instruction. Teachers use differentiated 2  instruction to meet the needs of the students. All of our beginner and intermediate students receive 360 minutes of ENL per week and all advanced students receive 180 minutes of ENL and 180 minutes of English language arts per week. The ENL teacher provides content area support for ELLs by using ENL methodologies, instructional strategies and scaffolding techniques such as modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text representation and metacognitive development. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students in ENL classes receive all instruction in English. As per New York State CR Part 154 regulations, all ELLs who score at the beginning and intermediate levels on the NYSESLAT receive 360 minutes of ENL weekly. Advanced students receive 180 minutes of ENL and 180 minutes of ELA weekly. All of our students are provided with high-quality instruction using scaffolding strategies in the delivery of the lessons. To achieve this, instruction is differentiated depending on the needs of the students and the data from LAB-R, NYSESLAT, ELA, Success Maker, Performance Series, and other assessments. The classroom teacher is a certified ENL teacher who is providing the services and/or a certified ENL teacher is pushing-in/pulling-out to provide the appropriate amount of minutes needed. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All students in our Dual Language program develop their second-language skills while learning content knowledge in both languages. Both groups provide good linguistic models for each other and, through their interactions, support language development in both languages. Students are expected to build academic skills in their first language and eventually transfer these skills to the second language. ELL and English proficient students are linguistically integrated for all content area instruction in all grades. In our side-by-side configuration, there are two classes that receive instruction from two teachers. The two teachers plan all instruction together in order to meet the academic and linguistic objectives of all the students. Instruction in reading, writing, math, science, and social studies is delivered in both English and Spanish every other day. In Kindergarten, first, second, third, fourth and fifth grades, this program will follow the Alternating Day Variant of 50:50 Model which involves two teachers, two linguistically integrated classes, and two separate classrooms. In the Dual Language classrooms follow the Alternating Day Variant of 50:50 Model. In this program, students will build upon academic skills in their first language and eventually transfer these skills to the second language. Language Arts is taught using NLA, ENL, and ELA strategies. Content area subjects are taught in both English and Spanish, using second language acquisition strategies, and the target language. Teachers use differentiated instruction to meet the needs of the students. All of our beginner/entering and low intermediate/emerging students receive 360 minutes of ENL per week and all advanced/commanding students receive 180 minutes of ENL and 180 minutes of English language arts per week. The ENL teacher provides content area support for ELLs by using ENL methodologies, instructional strategies and scaffolding techniques such as modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text representation and metacognitive development. Comprehension skills are addressed through the implementation of small group and individualized instruction. Techniques are used to work on children’s specific comprehension needs in order to increase their knowledge base in all subject areas. In addition, we utilize Wilson, RTI, and the push-in model during the school day to address students’ specific weaknesses in comprehension.Math skills and concepts are reinforced daily through the use of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Go Math Skills. Teachers work with small groups to reinforce skills, strategies, concepts, terminology and problem solving strategies during the school day. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students in grades K-2 will be appropriately evaluated in their native language (Spanish) throughout the year by using Estrellita placement test and Benchmark assessment tool. Based on the results, small groups will be formed, allowing for differentiated instruction throughout the year.In grades 3-5, all students who participated in the DL Program take Literacy Pathways to assess reading achievement in Spanish. The data obtained from all assessments is analyzed and used to drive instruction. In order to help English proficient students acquire Spanish, they will receive small group instruction by a certified and highly qualified Spanish Bilingual teacher. In order to continue providing a quality education to all our ELLs, we utilize our coach to offer 3  rigorous classroom instruction. We provide common prep time for teachers to plan collaboratively. In addition, we have periodic grade meetings and inquiry groups where teachers meet to plan and discuss instruction as well as the latest studies on language acquisition. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We currently have no SIFE students in our school.We emphasize English acquisition through the use of ENL strategies, methodologies and techniques such as visuals, repetition, TPR, and graphic organizers. We use these strategies throughout our school regardless if the children are Newcomers or Long Term ELLs. Many of our English Language Learners who have been in the country for less than 3 years (newcomers), and are in need of additional support in English, are offered the opportunity to attend the Saturday program where they receive small group tutoring to help with reading, writing and math. In the Saturday program, highly qualified and certified ENL teachers will provide high-quality instruction in English as a Second Language, English Language Arts, and Math using a variety of ENL methodologies.All ELLs receiving service for 4-6 years will focuses on enriching and amplifying their vocabulary, and strengthening their reading comprehension. Students who do not increase their NYSESLAT score from year-to-year receive AIS.Test accommodations are made for all ELL students on the NYS exams. ELLs and former ELLs (students who passed the NYSESLAT in the last two years) are given the allowable time and a half, separate location, and listening passages read three times instead of two. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Special Education students not meeting proficiency levels in English continue to be provided with push-in ENL services, which are provided by a certified ENL teacher. Paraprofessionals assigned to students are assigned according to language. All SWDs that require a bilingual paraprofessional due to their IEP have one. We emphasize English acquisition through the use of ENL strategies, methodologies and techniques such as visuals, repetition, TPR, and graphic organizers. We use these strategies throughout our school regardless if the children are Newcomers or Long Term ELLs. The ENL classrooms provide print-rich environments, which reflect instruction and students' current work as aligned with the ENL learning standards. Every classroom is equipped with a leveled library containing culturally diverse books. All of the classrooms have a computer center with a wide range of software and Internet access. Students who are not in a Self-Contained ENL classroom receive push-in services by certified and highly qualified ENL teachers who, after careful planning with the classroom teacher, incorporate ENL strategies and methodologies to help students acquire English through the content area. General education teachers and ENL teachers work collaboratively to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support while retaining content instruction time. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Special Education students not meeting proficiency levels in English continue to be provided with push-in ENL services which are provided by certified ENL teachers. Paraprofessionals assigned to students are assigned according to language when available. All special education students that require a bilingual paraprofessional due to their IEP have one. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Students in ENL classes receive all instruction in English. As per NYS CR Part 154 regulations, all ELLs who score at the beginning and intermediate levels on the NYSESLAT receive 360 minutes of ENL weekly. Advance students receive 180 minutes of ENL and 180 minutes of ELA weekly. All of our students are provided with high-quality instruction using scaffolding strategies in the delivery of the lessons. To achieve his instruction is differentiated depending on the needs of the students 4  and the data from ELE, LAB-R, NYSESLAT, ELA, Just Right Levels and other assessments.Many of our English Language Learners who have been in the country for less than 3 years (newcomers), and are in need of additional support in English, are offered the opportunity to attend the Rise and Shine program where they receive small group tutoring to help with reading, writing and math. If funding is available, students will be offered the opportunity to participate in a Saturday program, where highly qualified and certified ENL teachers will provide high-quality instruction in English Language Arts, and Math using a variety of ENL methodologies.All ELLs receiving service for 4-6 years will focuses on enriching and amplifying their vocabulary, and strengthening their reading comprehension. Students who do not increase their NYSESLAT score from year-to-year receive AIS.Test accommodations are made for all ELL students on the NYS exams. ELLs and former ELLs (students who passed the NYSESLAT in the last two years) are given the allowable time and a half, separate location, and listening passages read. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year we are incorporating more technology in the curriculum that is aligned to the NYS Common Core Learning Standards. Grades K-2 will continue to incorporate the Estrellita program to build on vocabulary and reading comprehension in Spanish. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We did not discontinue any programs this school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are included in all activities according to their classroom schedule. Students participate in all assemblies, shows and field trips. Parents are informed of all the after school programs we have in our building and follow the proper procedures to have their children join and attend. Our social worker is also available and is able to inform parents of after school programs in our community. Our parent coordinator also helps parents make arrangements to have their children placed in programs that will help them with their language needs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We are using the Estrellita program to support lower grades with their blending, literacy and reading comprehension. Interactive lessons are done on the ENO/Promethean Board to build vocabulary in the math, science, social studies and reading. We are building our classroom libraries with non fiction books. Our school library teacher is well aware of what each grade and class is studying and is always prepared to assist with planning and providing resources to enhance student learning. Teachers use document readers, laptops and the Internet to assist in their lessons. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We emphasize English language acquisition through the use of ENL strategies, methodologies and techniques such as visuals, repetition, TPR, and graphic organizers. Our goal is to assist students to achieve the state-designated level of English proficiency for their grade and to help ELLs meet or exceed the New York State common core learning standards. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our ENL out of classroom teacher, along with the administration, work closely together to make sure that the proper services are provided. There are also monthly instructional meetings where information gets shared and we are all aware of any issues or concerns and we work together to support our students in the proper class setting. All our students are in the proper classroom setting and are provided with accurate resources to assist in their learning experience. Materials such as books, posters, manipulatives, interactive boards, computers, laptops, and iPads are readily available to cater to all our students needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? This does not apply to our school. 5  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parent involvement is crucial to ensure the success of all ELLs at PS 166. From the moment the parents enter our school, they are made aware of the different programs designed to help the children achieve academic excellence. At the time of registration, Home Language Identification Surveys are carefully reviewed to determine which children are potential ELLs. In September, parents of ELL students attend an orientation session where they are made aware of programs that are available such as ENL, Transitional Bilingual and Dual Language Programs. During this orientation, parents will read literature and view a video in their native language about each program. Parents will then fill out the parent survey and program selection form. Each form will be analyzed to determine students' placement. After reviewing the "Parent Survey and Program Selection Form" for the past few years, the trend in program choice continues to be ENL. Parents of Spanish speaking students in Kindergarten continue to choose Dual Language over bilingual education. After careful evaluation of the "Parent Survey and Program Selection Form," students are placed according to the parents' choice.The Parent Coordinator meets with parents daily to discuss information about our school. For example, NYC schools account information, Lunch Form information, Kids Rise information, Arrival and Dismissal procedures, and Program Selections. She also schedules workshops on a various topics to inform our family community. Our guidance counselors provide ample information to the students about their transition into middle school. We schedule meetings during the day and in the evenings and invite parents to ask questions. We also send home flyers of where and when their will be middle school orientations. We have a close relationship with the middle schools in our area and the visit our school during PTA meeting to answer questions for the parents. All meetings, workshops etc. consist of an interpreter in order to provide accurate information to our families. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We only offer Spanish in our Dual Language Program. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All our ELL personnel is encouraged to sign up for various workshops they are interested in. Then they present what they have learned to the rest of the staff. Weekly workshops are incorporated into the teachers work schedule to allow them the opportunity to grow as professionals. They are encouraged to use the DOE website for various webinars and online workshops. Our field support team offers monthly workshops for professional development for ELL teachers in order to support our ELL population. Our teachers have been trained by Person for the new ReadyGen curriculum which is aligned to the Common Core. Our coach provide constant support. The DL/ENL coordinator is available to go into the classroom and do demo lessons. We have teachers that provide computer training or ENO/Smartboard assistance to allow their co-workers the opportunity to explore the technology world and provide them with tools to create interactive lessons for their students. 6  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our Dual Language program is a developmental, heterogeneous, language-enriched bilingual education program that integrates native English speakers with native speakers of Spanish for all of the content area instruction. All students in our Dual Language program develop their second-language skills while learning content knowledge in both languages. Both groups provide good linguistic models for each other and, through their interactions, support language development in both languages. Students are expected to build academic skills in their first language and eventually transfer these skills to the second language. ELL and English proficient students are linguistically integrated for all content area instruction in all grades. In our self-contained class, there is one teacher who provides instruction in both English and Spanish. In our side-by-side configuration, there are two classes that receive instruction from two teachers. The two teachers plan all instruction together in order to meet the academic and linguistic objectives of all the students. Instruction in reading, writing, math, science, and Social Studies is delivered in both English and Spanish every other day. The program will follow the Alternating Day Variant of 50:50 Model which involves two teachers, two linguistically integrated classes, and two separate classrooms.The classroom is divided into two sections, one for English, color-coded in blue and the other in Spanish, color-coded in red. In this program, students will build upon academic skills in their first language and eventually transfer these skills to the second language. Language Arts is taught using NLA, ENL, and ELA strategies. Content area subjects are taught in both English and Spanish, using second language acquisition strategies, and the target language. The classroom environment is designed to represent the Teacher’s College workshop model and balanced literacy in the daily instruction. Teachers use differentiated instruction to meet the needs of the students. All of our beginner and intermediate students receive 360 minutes of ENL per week and all advanced students receive 180 minutes of ENL and 180 minutes of English language arts per week. The ENL teacher provides content area support for ELLs by using ENL methodologies, instructional strategies and scaffolding techniques such as modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text representation and metacognitive development.Dual Language students In grades K-2 will be appropriately evaluated in their native language throughout the year by using the Estrellita placement test and Benchmark assessment tool. Based on the results. Small groups will be formed, allowing for differentiated instruction throughout the year. In grades 3-5, all students participating in the DL Program take the HLA to assess reading achievement in Spanish. The data obtained from all assessments is analyzed and used to drive instruction. In order to help English proficient students acquire Spanish, they will receive small group instruction by a certified and highly qualified Spanish Bilingual teacher. In order to continue providing a quality education to all our ELLS, we utilize our literacy coach to offer rigorous classroom instruction. We provide common prep time for Dual Language teachers to plan collaboratively. In addition, we have periodic grade meetings and inquiry groups where teachers meet to plan and discuss instruction as well as the latest studies on language acquisition. To provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development for ELLs-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals, we use flexible grouping for academic intervention, differentiation and the integration of ELLs into heterogeneous classes based on student needs and learning styles. Co-teaching, as well as integrating thematic and project-based learning enable teachers to help students to attain English proficiency. All service providers, including OT, PT and/or speech push in according to the child’s needs. Service providers, along with the classroom teacher, paraprofessional, and ENL teacher collaborate to discuss ENL strategies in order for the child to meet the IEP goals.Special Education students not meeting proficiency levels in English continue to be provided with push-in ENL services which are provided by certified ENL teachers. Paraprofessionals assigned to students are assigned according to language when available. All special education students that require a bilingual paraprofessional due to their IEP have one. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? From the moment parents enter our school, they are made aware of the different programs designed to help their children achieve academic excellence. Interpretation services are available for parents to ensure that information is communicated 7  properly. In the Spring, parents of incoming students are invited to attend an open house. At this time, administrators, teachers, parent coordinator, ENL and DL teachers, Guidance Counselor, and interpreters greet and speak to the parents about the school. Parents are informed of the different programs, activities, events and special services available to their children such as Speech and Language, Physical Therapy, music and multicultural events. At the end of the orientation, parents are encouraged to ask questions and are finally taken on a tour of the school.To keep parents abreast of the different programs within our school, P.S. 166 provides parents of ELL students with at least three parent orientation meetings during the year. The Fall orientation is to inform parents of the programs available for ELL’s such as Transitional bilingual, Freestanding English as a Second Language, and Dual Language. The Winter and Spring orientations focus on informing parents of the different tests, assessments and their implications. During these orientations interpreters of different languages are present. Teachers also have at least two one-on-one meetings with parents of ELL students to discuss student goals, student progress and assessment results. Records of these meetings are kept on file. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Parent Coordinator is the link between the parents and the school community. She familiarizes the parents with the immediate community and informs them of resources such as local doctors, health care institutions, legal services, and any other services which may be needed by parents, such as immigration, citizenship, housing, food stamps, etc.The Parent Coordinator, conducts ENL classes for the parents weekly. She sometimes incorporates activities such as crocheting or Arts and Crafts so that parents experience a variety of activities and learn language skills needed for completing these activities. The Parent Coordinator also trains the parents to access the DOE website and use the Parent Link to acquire valuable information regarding their child’s education.The Parent Coordinator assists the coaches in offering math and literacy workshops throughout the year. These workshops inform parents of math and reading programs in the building. In addition, the workshops teach parents how to help their children improve math and literacy skills at home. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jessica Geller, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Henry Gradstein School School DBN: 30Q166 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jessica Geller Title Principal Katherine Tsimis Georgiou Assistant Principal Milagros Diaz Parent Coordinator Tina Tomais ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maritza Baqueiro Parent Anastasia Smith Teacher/Subject Area Penelopi Kikis Teacher/Subject Area Kari Seitz Kari Seitz Coach Coach Janis Soper School Counselor Dr, Phillip Composto Nancy DiMaggio Valerie McGuckin Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Field Support Liaison Other Related-Service Provider Laurie Robilotto Other ENL Teacher Millagros Diaz Other Parent coordinator Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/17/18 09/17/18 09/17/18 09/17/18 09/17/18 09/17/18 09/17/18 09/17/18 09/17/18 09/17/18 09/17/18 09/17/18 09/17/18 09/17/18 09/17/18 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q166 School Name: The Henry Gradstein School Superintendent: Dr. Composto The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Milagros Helen Diaz Lazos Parent Coordinator Secretary Yes Yes Yes No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home Language Identification Surveys (HLIS) are completed by the parents in their home language and results are analyzed. In addition to the HLIS, parents are sent home a second language survey from our school asking them to indicate their language of preference for any communication between the family and school. This second survey is especially helpful in situations where the parents are of different backgrounds and do not speak the same language. The parent who is responsible for communicating with the school is the one whose language is most often requested for correspondence. Responses are analyzed and parents then receive written and oral information from the school in the language they have requested. Information from the students' Emergency Contact cards are also used when a staff member uses it to call home about an emergency situation or to discuss the students' progress and/or behavior. 1  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Adangm Arabic Chinese Greek Hindi Korean Mandarin Philipino Punjabi Adangm Arabic Chinese Greek Hindi Korean Mandarin Philipino Punjabi Portuguese Portuguese Russian English Spanish Bengali Russian English Spanish Bengali 0.00 2.69 1.23 0.15 0.08 0.15 0.00 0.08 0.23 0.61 0.61 63.98 23 8.28 Adangm Arabic Chinese Greek Hindi Korean Mandarin Philopino Punjabi Portuguese Russian English Spanish Bangali 0.08 2.92 1.08 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.08 0.23 0.69 0.08 63.98 23.34 8.89 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Parent Handbook September Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use in-house staff to translate documents. All documents are prepared ahead of time giving us enough time to translate in the necessary languages. 2  Calendars Monthly PTA Agendas Once a month Event Flyers At least a week before the event Testing Meetings Notices Character Parade letter At least a week before the event. October A week before Half-day of school notices Open School notice A week before Winter Recess letter A week before Science Fair notice February Book Fair notice February Read Aloud with Friends Day March 3  Lunch Forms Meal Plan information September September Last Day of School notice June Parent-Teacher conference notices Two weeks before the scheduled meetings. We use in-house staff to translate documents. All documents are prepared ahead of time giving us enough time to translate in the necessary languages. We use in-house staff to translate documents. All documents are prepared ahead of time giving us enough time to translate in the necessary languages. We use in-house staff to translate documents. All documents are prepared ahead of time giving us enough time to translate in the necessary languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Meet the Teacher September Parent-teacher conferences December G&T orientation September Dual Language meeting Testing Meeting Ongoing interpretation service(s)? We call and use the interpretation services over the phone. Families bring an interpreter. We request an interpreter. We use staff/faculty. 4  Extensive absences meetings February IEP meetings monthly ongoing We call and use the interpretation services over the phone. Families bring an interpreter. Spring Kindergarten Orientation We request an interpreter. We use staff/faculty. We call and use the interpretation services over the phone. Families bring an interpreter. We request an interpreter. We use staff/faculty. We call and use the interpretation services over the phone. Extensive latenesses meeting monthly Meet the Teacher meeting Fall/Spring 5  Families bring an interpreter. We request an interpreter. We use staff/faculty. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use our blast e-mail and text messaging service along with our website to inform our families. Our text and email service is in English and Spanish. Our website information can be translated in any language needed. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our staff will be provided with the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 via email. They will sign off that they have read the regulation and provide necessary translation and interpretation when needed and necessary. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) When entering the school building, visitors will see signs indicating where to go for translation and interpretation services. Every parent, regardless of the language they speak, will continue to be allowed into the building as long as they show valid identification to the safety agent at the main entrance. The parents are welcomed to work with our parent coordinator about any information they might need about their child's education or events at the school or our community. Our parent coordinator is extremely helpful and is always available to assist parents with getting the proper interpretation and translation services. She is very aware of our parents' needs. Our staff is also very aware of using over-the-phone interpreters during scheduled meetings. We also have people on staff who are fluent in the languages our school community needs and they are willing to help interpret and translate as needed. Parents are given information regarding the DOE website during PTA meetings and our parent coordinator gives workshops informing parents of the website and shows them how to access the information they need. We will obtain translation of signs, notices, flyers and forms in the languages shared by more than 10% of the school's population. These documents will be posted and provided in accordance with the Chancellor's Regulations A-663. For the languages less 6  than 10% we will continue to provide our families with the necessary translation and interpretation services using in-house staff or volunteers. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will continue to gather feedback from the parent survey on the quality and availability of services. Parents may also email us with their any questions or feedback. Our PTA meetings is another way that parents can make suggestions or voice their opinions about our schools translation and interpretation services. The parent coordinator will schedule a focus group of parents inclusive off all cultures and languages represented in our school to gather feedback and best practices on communicating with families. Finally, our parent coordinator is always available for our families and she shares all feedback with the administration. 7 
