 25Q185 School Name: J.H.S. 185 EDWARD BLEEKER Principal: THERESA MSHAR   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Edward Bleeker 342500010185 6, 7, 8 School Number (DBN): 25Q185 147-26 25 th Drive, Flushing, N.Y. 11345 (718) 445-3232 (718) 359-5352 Phone Number: Fax: Theresa Mshar TMshar@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Theresa Mshar Mario Fanelli Olga Chartzoulakis MichealBadillo Olga Chartzoulakis Na Na Na District Information Geographical District: 25 Superintendent’s Office Address: Danielle DiMango Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place, Room 306, Flushing, NY 11354 DDiMang@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-7605 Phone Number: 718-281-7690 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens North Field Support Center FSC: Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director: QPN28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens 11101 4th Floor Executive Director’s Office Address: lpendgast@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Theresa Mshar Mario Fanelli Olga Chartzoulakis NA Olga Chartzoulakis N/A N/A NA *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent   Vicki Benjamin Heather Drastal BetsyLodestro JoannAcquista MichaelBadillo EftehiaAgresta SusanIgnaciuk NA NA Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The family Bleeker JHS provides students with a strong educational foundation needed to thrive as global citizens in a rapidly changing world. It prepares them for college and a career of their choice. Our school is focused on high academic achievement, rooted in rigorous instruction through critical thinking and problem solving. We help foster students' self-esteem by optimizing the social-emotional needs of individual children in a culturally diverse environment in order to create active life long learners. Our school puts children at the center of their own learning by meeting the individual needs of all of our students through individualized programming for students. We ensure   that every student’s individual educational experience is engaging, challenging, purposeful, ensures mastery of academic standards and enables them to take ownership of their learning. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We are an ethnically and culturally diverse middle school, in which students from all over the world are made to feel welcome and are provided with the opportunity to succeed, regardless of their national origin, home language, cultural background, or domestic situation. We are partnered with numerous community organizations, social and academic programs, and cultural institutions to help ground our students in the value of community, while maintaining levels of academic success high enough to merit admission to prestigious high schools. Although, J.H.S. 185 is a very large school, serving over 1,500 students, we pride ourselves as being a community school. Our focus is on the whole child. As it is crucial for our students to grow with us, we have an advisory team for each grade level, which moves up with them from 6th grade to 8th grade graduation. From our years as a new Magnet School to the present, we have been fortunate to attract the enrollment of outstanding children, both from the local “zoned” neighborhood as well as from the wider Queens community. In recent years, our school has gained valuable experience and expertise in all six elements of the Framework for Great Schools. Through reflective practice, forward thinking planning, and positive partnerships and collaborations, our school has increased student enrollment, increased performance on standardized assessments, and strengthened relationships with families and the community. We have successfully adopted and implemented numerous innovative and engaging programs, including Arts Connection, Silk Road, Software Engineering, Google Apps for Education, Learning Partners and Pupil Path. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In 2018-2019, we are entering year three of implementing our revised ELA curriculum for ELLs. ELL students follow the Expeditionary Learning (EL) curriculum and/or the Educating Powerful Writers curriculum based on their English proficiency levels. Teachers of both courses provide students with specific scaffolds and modifications to meet their needs. All ELLs need support in reading complex texts and acquiring thematic vocabulary. Students also receive scaffolds and modifications during their Writing class to help with writing various genres. At the Entering and Emerging levels, students attend a standalone class 4 periods a week where teachers use the National Geographic Learning curriculum to support students at these levels in both the content areas and ELA. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In the 2017-2018 school year, our goal for Effective School Leadership was to promote our staff's competencies in data analysis, curriculum revision, and instructional improvement. The impact of this goal was to increase progress towards achieving proficiency in the Common Core Learning Standards. On the 2018 New York State assessments, there was a 3% increase in math proficiency, and a 4% increase in ELA proficiency. Based on our needs assessment, our PD team realized that our instructional focus had to change to reflect the goals we have set for this school year. Our new instructional focus, which is to foster strong discussions that are rooted in deep questions, ties all of our CEP goals together, encapsulating the essence of what we would like to work on as learners this school year. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q185 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1521 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 51 53 28 42 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 50 42 43 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 66.9% % Reduced Lunch 12.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 29.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 11.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.74 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 64.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES NO YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 157 153 31 96.0% 9.7% 14.4% 2.6% 55.7% 0.7% 6 23% 5.6 63.7% 72% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A NO YES YES YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  In the 2017-2018 school year, JHS 185 had 181 students take the Algebra I course and Regents exam. One-hundred percent of the students successfully complete the course and passed the exam.  The number of students enrolled in Regents mathematics increased from the previous year by 20%, with 31 additional students taking the course.  This year, the school has transitioned from class scheduling to individualized student scheduling. As a result, students have options to take any combination of Regents courses offered at JHS 185, including Algebra, Living Environment, and US History. Previously, with class scheduling, students only had the option to take all three Regents courses or none.  Our school wide average score was 86%, which is 20 percentage points above the city average.  All 8th grade math teachers have training and teaching experience in the Algebra I curriculum. Sixth and  seventh grade teachers have been working on curriculum revision and vertical planning to expand opportunities for students to take Algebra I in 8th grade. Sixth and seventh grade math classes, and non-Regents eighth grade math classes, are utilizing cross-grade textbooks and resources. This strategy has allowed for a focus on grade-level standards, while also emphasizing higher-grade knowledge and skills.  Baseline and benchmark data are collected and analyzed over the course of the school year.   Math teachers of the 6th grade have been working with the Ready Gen math coach to refine practices that Feedback from the District includes a need to focus on Questioning and Discussion and Engagement. strengthen problem solving, critical thinking, and academic discourse. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will begin building school wide capacity for “Algebra for All” that includes the use of data to drive curricula and instructional decision making. This will include rigorous algebra concepts in sixth and seventh grade. We will utilize strategic individualized programming in order to increase the number of students successfully participating and attaining proficiency on Algebra Regents by 5%. By focusing on the Framework"s components 3b Questioning and Discussion and 3C Student Engagement, students will actively work to improve their critical thinking skills across the content areas. They will be able to articulate ideas 2  through their writing and discussions. Students who are actively engaged and participating in discussions will reach levels of deeper comprehension which will be apparent in their achievement. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All pedagogues Throughout the year Instructional cabinet and model teachers   development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Strategically design professional development with a focus on increasing student engagement and questioning and discussion skills through project-based learning.  Provide individualized professional development based on identified teacher needs using the professional learning offerings from the Field Support Center.  Providing opportunities for teachers to develop their use of technology in their classroom in order to increase student engagement and learning.  Math department will partake in vertical alignment meetings led by model teachers and instructional cabinet  Math teachers will be sent to external Algebra for all PDs  Weekly grade level meetings as well as common planning built into teachers schedules Strategic implementation of curricula from Go Math   Math coach provided by the city will work with the sixth  grade team for 8 days of professional development. Sixth grade math teachers will work with 5th grade math teachers from our feeder school to improve vertical alignment of the curriculum.  The Periodic Assessments will be utilized to engage in progress monitoring, as well as the analysis of grade wide common unit exam data. Inter-visitations of lab classrooms that specifically show effective student engagement/questioning and discussion practices through students working together to search for understanding, solving a problem, completing a task, or creating a product that represents their mastery of the content. All pedagogues Teachers Throughout the year: two cycles of inter-visitations Teachers collaboratively revise curriculum maps, tasks, and assessments to include elements of collaborative learning and increased rigor. Teachers are being supported by additional external professional development. All teachers At least once a week NYCDOE Periodic Assessments for Math will be to all students (October 2018, February 2019, June 2019). The October assessments will be utilized as a diagnostic tool, which will then Students Three times a year APs, teachers, instructional cabinet, lead teachers Math teachers 4 determine instructional groups, based on the standards or skills, to provide instructional intervention. Mid-unit and end unit tasks will also be used to analyze and revise curriculum as needed. AIS/Additional Academic Support  Small Group instruction and peer tutoring of at-risk students Students in need of support AIS services provided on a daily basis Teachers /All staff Workshops for parents that model the planned types of engagement and collaboration that their children are experiencing in their classes on a daily basis. Parents and Students Monthly workshops Parent coordinator and Model teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent coordinator, will be responsible for the implementation of workshops for parents during which they will engage in collaborative activities similar to those in which their children participate during class time. Model Teachers are available for mini-workshops on Tuesdays' parent engagement time to assist parents in understanding the common core and strategies used to support students during lessons. This opportunity will take place once a month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources to be used to facilitate this goal alignment: NYSTL funds for curriculum materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachboost tracking throughout the year will be used to record both formal and informal walk-throughs, specifically for Danielson's 3B and 3C, for all teachers. Two cycles of inter-visitations will support teachers' study to ensure that strategies for questioning and discussion and engagement are embedded in all lesson plans. 5  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachboost informal and formal walk-throughs Advance System of observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our PBIS Tiered Fidelity Survey showed that we needed to improve our school climate by coordinating all of our school climate initiatives. Our data has shown an increase in our Level 1-5 incidents and suspensions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will foster a supportive environment through the implementation of social -emotional learning strategies that support a positive classroom atmosphere. We expect all school staff members to be cognizant of the developmental needs of our students. This will be measured using Domain 2 of the Danielson Framework, which focuses on classroom exchanges between students as well as with the teacher, by an increase of 5% in Component 2a Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Team of teachers working with Community School All Staff 2x a year All Staff District 25 Office and the Queens North Field Support Center are collaborating to develop a program to provide direct support to JHS 185 in an effort to reduce the Level 3,4,5 infractions.  Ninety percent of the staff will receive training on improving ways to address the social - emotional needs of students and its relationship to improving student academic outcomes.  Teachers will participate in Brain Power Wellness  sessions, in which they will engage in hands on activities on Focusing Strategy and Mindfulness Strategy. In addition teachers will continue to use Teq online professional development sessions for S.E.L. Individualized scheduling Scheduling of home visits with PS 21 teachers. Student created S.E.L charters     Piloting alternative special education strategies including: flexible seating and discussion techniques designed for SWDs Teachers will continue to implement and enforce consistent peer-feedback opportunities for the students, in order for students to feel supported academically. This process began during last year’s PD cycle, and will continue throughout this year's cycle as well. This two year cycle is based on the research of Bruce Joyce and Beverly Showers, who state that teachers must try a new strategy twenty times before the teachers achieve mastery. Parent Engagement Workshops on social emotional needs of students and how these needs relate to student academic outcomes, with the intention that strategies parents learn will be applied at home as well. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Instructional team PD Team Parents Alternate months Parent coordinator Cabinet. 8  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator will survey parents as to the workshops they would like to have in order to support families in creating a supportive environment for their children. Parents are provided with two workshops a year on Autism by teachers who have attending the Autism Speaks awareness workshops. Parents are provided with four workshops a year on Social Emotional well being of students. In addition, we will be working with PS 21 to provide parents with multiple workshops to support social emotional awareness at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Using Brain Power Wellness from the research of Marjorie Haley,"Understanding Learning-Centered Instruction from the Perspective of Multiple Intelligences", and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, "Exercise Improves Learning and Memory", students and teachers will engage in bi-weekly sessions to improve social emotional learning. Teachers will be equipped with the tools needed to continue this work daily, after completing the training. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  PD Team-created surveys will include beginning, middle, and/end surveys for teachers involved in the professional learning cycles.  PD team will also create student surveys to assess whether or not we are making progress in social emotional student well being.  Responses from the Schools Environment Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  The final professional learning cycle survey  NYCDOE Learning Environment Survey  Pre and post student surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Feedback from PPO's had shown well developed in teacher teams. Common planning teams work together to revise curriculum using classroom data. We want to continue to drill down in our inquiry cycles during common planning teams by using individual student work samples in our inquiry studies. We have identified our sub group of students that have not been making progress as per our NYSED report card. In doing so, teachers are aware of the sub group of students and have been implementing strategies focused to help improve their engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 97% of the teachers will be actively involved in common planning, curriculum revision, and conducting inter-visitations, with a focus on increasing student engagement, collaboration, and improving student discussion skills, as evidenced by improvement for teachers in MOTP ratings in 1E and 3B. 93% percent of teachers will be rated as effective or highly effective in 1E or 3B During common planning time teachers will be engaged in discussions, based on student work, to identify specific subgroups in order to create strategies for their specific educational needs. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide professional development protocols for looking at student work during teacher team meetings, with a focus on analysing student work and assessment. Teacher teams:  Plan collaboratively in teacher teams to revise lessons with a focus on including student collaboration  Align instructional practices vertically and horizontally within units of study  Revise professional learning cycle as needed Redesign tasks for more rigorous expectations across core subjects. Modifying curriculum maps to reflect Next Generations Learning Standards for E and Math . Implementing Reading, Writing , Speaking and Listening Standards across all subjects. The professional development team will begin their work with Eleanor Drago-Severson from Teachers College in a study of adult learning. They will be engaged in professional development lead by Dr. Drago-Severson using the book, "Helping Teachers Learn". Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students at the bottom third in performance in each class Teachers September 2018-2019 Pd Team and outside resources Instructional Cabinet All Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 conducted on a weekly basis Teachers November 2018- June 2019 Instructional Cabinet Lead Teachers/ PD Team 3b – Family Engagement 1  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, we will increase the opportunities for parents to volunteer and observe instructional practices resulting in a 2% in increase in parents responding positively on the survey questions on NYC School Survey. The parent coordinator will be responsible for the the implementation of workshops for parents to engage in the work of teacher parent collaborations. All teachers will assist parents in accessing Pupil Path to facilitate open communication. Model Teachers are available for mini-workshops on Tuesdays, during parent engagement time, to assist parents in the use of Pupil Path. A team of six teachers participated in the Parent Teacher home visit training and will begin this work in November. The implementation of this process will increase options for parents to ask questions about instructional practices in school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources to be used to facilitate this goalalignment: Per session funding is available for teachers to attend professional development. NYSTL software funding is used for the purchase of Skedula. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Team meeting templates posted on Google Drive and digital notebooks will provide evidence of teacher discussions and student work based on data analysis. Classroom observations will show an increase in component 3D , Using Assessment in Instruction, specifically the element of providing meaningful student feedback. This will be monitored by the instructional cabinet, as well as by teachers through inter-visitations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Baseline and benchmark assessments in math and ELA  Tasks in Social Studies and Science  Student and teacher surveys after PD cycles that focus on the use of formative assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  In math, JHS 185 outperformed the city on the percentage of students at proficiency, with 64% of JHS 185 students at proficiency compared to 64% for the district and 45% for the city.  The proficiency rate increased from the previous year, with a three percentage-point increase from 61% in 2017.  General education and special education cohorts both made four percentage-point increases in proficiency rates from 2017 to 2018.  The sixth grade proficiency rate was 67%, which was a two percentage point increase over the previous year.  The seventh grade proficiency rate was 70%, which was a two percentage point increase over the previous year.  The eighth grade proficiency rate was 49%, which was a seven percentage point increase over the previous year. The eighth grade students taking the Regents exam did not take the NY State mathematics assessment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will actively participate in collaborative teams on inquiry focused work on student work analysis, curriculum revision, task design, and instructional improvement to reflect implementation of Next Generation standards. The anticipated measure will be that students will demonstrate progress toward meeting standards, as evidenced by a 2% increase in the NY State Math proficiency ratings in levels 3 and 4. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers Twice a Instructional Cabinet ALL grade department teachers will engage in professional learning cycles, which will include:  data analysis   creation of action plans with instructional goals set student work analysis The Periodic Assessment will be utilized to engage in progress monitoring, as well as through the analysis of grade-wide common unit exam data. week grade meetings PD Team September 2018- June 2019 Brain Power Mentors Model Teachers in each department PD Team Cycles of Learning Progress Monitoring Feedback Forms Pre- and Post-Cycle Focus on coherent instruction, creating multiple entry points, and increasing the rigor for cohorts of students by emphasizing the growth mindset (goals setting and reflection). All Teachers Twice a Instructional Cabinet week grade meetings PD Team curriculum maps rigorous tasks common assessments     data-based refinements ALL Professional Development September 2018- June 2019 All Teachers September 2018 - June Instructional Cabinet PD Team 4 2019 on a daily basis  Providing opportunities for teachers to grow as professionals by reflecting on their practice, through their individual professional development plan.  Differentiated professional development, such as book clubs and inter-visitations, which include time for assessment and reflection. Teachers will have the opportunity to engage in book clubs of their choice this year .  Use of rubrics with the language of CCLS to provide specific feedback to students  Use of student data to plan and set student goals  Addressing rigor, such as research-based questioning strategies (Bloom's Taxonomy and Depth of Knowledge) to challenge all students. Model teacher will provide parents with workshops to assist in their understanding of the academic structure needed for students to be successful. Parents and Students On a monthly basis starting in October 2018 - June 2019 Instructional Cabinet PD Team Parent Engagement committee Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator will work with the members of the PTA and the SLT to support parents in understanding parent teacher partnership. Workshops will be provided for families by Model teachers on Tuesdays. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding will be used for teacher professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 5  Common unit assessments will be utilized on the grade level to gauge the progress of the students for the standards on which they are assessed. Curriculum changes are made thereafter. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Framework, Teachboost, Walk-throughs, inter-visitations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our strength is in reaching our 2017-2018 goal of increasing parental involvement in the school by a 10%. We achieved this increase in parental attendance by providing more events and community engagement activities. However, we have noticed that our parents of ELL students did not increase. This was most evident on the our Student of the Month nights where our ELL students would come to the event without being accompanied by a parent. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase parental involvement of ELL students by 5% through facilitated bilingual communication meetings and translated written and video communication. This will empower ELL parents and provide multiple opportunities for them to engage in community activities. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents will be asked to volunteer at more events (Math Casino night, Science Sensation night, performances, Literacy Night etc.) Parents one day events throughout the 2018-2019 school year Parent Engagement committee Parent coordinator PD Team We will also be partnering with PS 21 in making home visits. The goal is to engage families in conversations about the hopes and dreams for the students in our school. www.talkingpoints.org will facilitate bilingual communication. Meetings for the parents of ELLs will be scheduled during Tuesday parent engagement time to go through progress reports and prepare plans for improvement Translated communication will provided by Skedula The Principal will via VLOG to inform parents about activities taking place in the school. Have parents attend writing celebrations/end of unit celebrations of student work so that students would be proud to have their parents at school. Parents 2x's per year Parent Engagement committee Parent coordinator ELA lead teachers Parent Coordinator and Cabinet Monthly morning activities for parents, ex: Muffins with Mom, Donuts with the Deans. Parents once a month 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session funding will be used for teachers to plan workshops requested by parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Number of parents attending events will be calculated. Events will be planned according to parent schedules. Parents that can not attend will be asked to participate in our home visit schedules in order to engage them in their students learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Increased attendance at parent meetings and parent workshops. Parents' responses in the Learning Environment Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State assessment Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, one to one mentoring for ELLs, lunch-time tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the day and morning program Saturday program Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.)  Bottomone-third SWDsare receiving additional literacy support with the librarian as they are accessing i-Ready instructional support Scaffolds   Vocabulary   supports i-Station instructional program in conjunction with the online assessments Fast Forward for ELLsor other students who require reading recovery. Mathematics I-Station is being used for students who did not make gains on the math state assessment Scaffolds   Vocabulary supports i Station  Small group, one to one, lunch tutoring During the day, After-school Saturday program 0  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Data from gradePPTmeeting: Level1s and low level 2s; teacher and guidance counselor recommendation Data from gradePPTmeeting: Level1s and low level 2s; teacher and guidance counselor recommendation Data from grade PPT meeting: identified students Scaffolds   Vocabulary supports Small group, one to one , lunch tutoring During the day After-school Scaffolds   Vocabulary supports Small group, one to one, lunch tutoring During the day After-school May receive at-risk counseling from grade guidance counselor for an 8 week period to monitor Small group, one to one, peer tutoring, student mentoring  may receive CCNYreferral for our in-house two-day a week social worker  may receive external counseling referral services list At-risk services provided by the counselor are delivered in small groups with a maximum of 5 students or one to one, during the school day. At risk services provided by the school psychologist is delivered one to one on an as need basis during the school day. At-risk services provided by the social worker are delivered on a one-to-one and on an as-needed basis. PPC (weekly) Dean'smeeting (weekly) Attendance Team (weekly) meetings 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 10 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students are provided with the basic necessities. Guidance counselor is available for both parent and student. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment Our Student Teachers program , in affiliation with Queens College, SUNY, CUNY, St. John’s University, and Teachers College, gives us the opportunity to accept and assess potential new pedagogical staff as early as their student teaching experiences. At present, at least four of our full time faculty began as student teachers with us and are now professional teachers in tenure track programs. Once there is an identified vacancy, resumes received from candidates and from New Teacher Finder are screened as to whether or not the teacher obtained the proper state certification for that particular subject area. The candidate is provided an opportunity to connect with the department assistant principal either in writing or through a phone call. Teachers, who may be future colleagues, have the opportunity to sit in on interviews depending on their availability. When the candidate comes in for an interview, approximately 45 minute is allotted to question the candidate on educational philosophy, pedagogy, classroom management skills, and contributions he or she can provide to the school community. The teacher’s portfolio provides additional information about curriculum and lesson planning skills. Every candidate is asked to create a lesson plan based on a set of directions for that particular subject with a copy of the CCLS. There is no specific time limit set for this planning. A separate principal interview is conducted after the lesson plan has been reviewed by the assistant principal. If time allows for it, a demo lesson may be requested for another day. Retention, Assignments, and Support New teachers are invited to attend a voluntary one-day New Teacher Orientation prior to the official start of the school year. This orientation provides pertinent information about the school’s protocols and procedures, professional development that includes informational sessions about specific cohorts, such as ELLs, SWDs, and effective instruction, focused on research-based strategies. Presenters include assistant principals and leadership 4  team of model teachers from all content area teachers, as well as other support staff. The two days also provide the new teachers with the opportunity to meet their peers and to acclimate themselves to our school environment. Time is also provided to set up their classrooms once the orientation ends. Continuous support is provided to our new teachers by matching them to a mentor, who is a tenured teacher, in the specific content area. This mentor interacts with the new teacher at least twice a week. This includes observation feedback, visiting other classrooms for inter-visitations, and aspects of lesson planning. All new teachers participate in staff professional development days that have been allocated for this purpose, such as the Chancellor’s days. The expectation is that they take away strategies from these days that they can implement in their lessons. Supervisors of the departments provide feedback in their observations and walk-throughs, as to their progress in instructional expectations. New teachers receive one formal observations from the supervising assistant principal and an informal observation from the principal. This is in addition to the periodic walk-throughs that are conducted throughout the year. A series of separate New Teacher workshops are provided throughout the year on an as needed basis. Some of the routine workshop titles are, “how to conduct the first parent teacher conference, the teacher tenure process, supporting ELLs/SWDs.” The programming of the school includes additional new teacher support by scheduling every teacher a common planning period with their grade department colleagues once weekly. There is additional teacher collaboration once weekly that has been set aside for inquiry team meetings, which further fosters professional learning communities. Support from a F-Status supervisor is provided for any teacher new to JHS 185. This includes tenured teachers as well. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, and paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our professional development has been aligned to this year’s NYCDOE’s instructional expectations. Our CEP goals and our school’s instructional focus align with this. External Professional Development • Principal’s Weekly is utilized to identify relevant PD opportunities • District 25 professional development: There are monthly scheduled meetings, which are attended by administrators and teachers selected by the administration. Queens North Borough Support Center also provides professional development throughout the school year. The administrators choose which teachers to send to these meetings, and then the teachers turnkey this information to the pertinent people. These meetings include trainings for principals, ELA, math, science, social studies, new teachers, special education, and guidance. • Other outside organizations are contracted on a needs basis. For example, after identifying the need to provide special ed. ICT teachers planning for effective instruction, a consultant (a former DOE employee) has been contracted for this purpose. BEHR has been an organization that we have used in the past and will continue to use. This year teachers will be provided training on their own Communication Style by Exec/Comm. This training on teachers personal communication style will provide teachers the opportunity to communicate better with not only students, but also with their colleagues. Any staff member can initiate his/her own professional development opportunity and we accommodate this after reviewing its content. Internal Professional Development Model teachers from each department comprise the PD team. Our professional development is led by a team of model teachers spanning all content areas. The PD team creates PD materials from information gained at District 25 PDs, research based methods, and shared practices. The team facilitates professional development cycles with a pre-5  established focus in mind. First, the team uses school-wide data to establish the area of need for professional development. Each cycle usually contains time for the teachers to reflect upon the focus which helps the team establish data for the beginning of the cycle. Then teachers receive training on the focus, which is followed by time to implement the new strategy into their teaching. Inter-visitations will take place after each new cycle. This system will provide a structure that supports all teachers with strategic content. These model teachers are working collaboratively within the building to cultivate a culture of shared leadership, where they will take ownership for improving teacher practice and student outcomes. As model teachers, their role is to facilitate the learning of their colleagues within professional learning communities and to promote ongoing professional growth focused on effective classroom instruction, peer coaching, collaborative learning and problem solving. In order to provide our professional development team growth in their own development, they will participate in a cycle of learning with Eleanor Drago-Severson. This professional learning cycle will be centered around the book, "Helping Teachers Learn". Because teaching is sometimes isolated, these session will provide the PD team a new view on having teachers collaborate on student learning, curriculum changes, and providing the best strategies for student achievement. The administration, model teachers/core inquiry team, and designated ENL and Sp. Ed. Teachers are the members that create meaningful internal PDs. External PDs, ASCD institutional membership, and the Teaching Channel are the main resources that are utilized to create our staff PDs. Teachers share resources and practices through Google Drive and the WeTeach system. This is another way to share helpful resources with our staff. We deliver professional development to our school’s learning community during: August one day trainings: ELA and Math Curriculum PDs; New Teacher Orientation • Mandated Chancellor’s days (September, November, June) focused on instruction • Weekly cabinet meetings • Weekly common planning meetings by grade departments • Bi-weekly core inquiry team meetings • Weekly Inquiry meetings by cross-content, department, faculty, and grade • Monthly New Teacher Meeting The teacher team meetings are a way for our pedagogical staff to collaboratively learn from each other. All are involved in common planning and inquiry teams in which they are gathering and analyzing data from: 1. New York State exams for the purpose of instruction, 2. Student work to identify strengths and target areas for instruction 6  3. Teacher-based assessments, 4. Classroom instruction (lesson plans) • Revise and/or prepare curriculum and lesson plans that are aligned to the Common Core State Standards and our schools instructional foci. Teachers work on: 1. Gathering materials and resources to heighten student engagement, rigor, and improve skills and strategies in the areas of reading, writing and critical thinking skills for literacy and the math instructional shifts 2. Creating student tasks based on the Common Core State Standards 3. Incorporating enriched and differentiated lessons/assessments (small group and individual instruction) 4. Decision-making regarding the use of academic assessments to evaluate the effectiveness of the strategies/activities 5. Gaining a deeper understanding of effective questioning techniques to encourage high-order thinking 6. Students, teachers, and administration will be reflecting on their work frequently. We will all set goals for ourselves. Students will engage in routines to give their peers feedback on class work. Teachers are also focused on giving specific and actionable feedback to students based on formative and summative assessments with the students' goals in mind. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 7  NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Representative staff meets during September to agree upon implementation of MOSL, choice of curricula, composition of local exam assessments and dissemination to rest of teaching staff throughout the school year. In our IPC meetings we review and analyze each teacher's MOSL state and local data. Each department was provided a professional development session based on the multiple assessment measures and their MOSL options. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 680316 0 26062 14693 12,402,997 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 8  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. [Edward Bleeker JHS 185] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of theEvery Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [Edward Bleeker JHS 185] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 0  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, social and emotional supports and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 1  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Edward Bleeker JHS 185Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary EducationAct, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 2  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● Using academic learning time efficiently; ● Rrespecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed, encouraging student led conferences. ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 3  ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 4  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 5  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our morning program will be open to all levels of ELLs, but we will focus on recruiting entering and emerging level ELLs. On the 2018 NYSESLAT our current students scored as follows: The trained pedagogue involved during the registration process will encourage the ELL students and their families to enroll their children in the before school program. We will distribute permission slips during ENL classes, and we will continue recruiting students by contacting the parents of students who are more at risk (newcomers and Entering level ELLs).During the enrollment process, we recruit newcomer ELLs to join the morning Title lll classes, in order to assist with their transition to our school. We will conduct our before-school Title III program before school 3 days a week on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays from November 13 to May 9 for a total of 67 sessions. The program will run from 7:15 a.m to 8 a.m. One ENL and one content area teacher will run the program. This program will be for entering and emerging ELLs in all grades with targeted instruction in reading and writing. The materials we will use for this program include Fast ForWord Reading Intervention. Fast ForWord includes a three-part plan: Prepare the brain for learning, Practice language and reading skills intensely, and Read aloud with guidance from an expert. The program provides intense and personalized practice in grammar, vocabulary, reading, and listening comprehension. The number of teachers needed will be determined based on the final student enrollment in August according to the NYSESLAT results and the number of new admits. Teachers will be certified in a content area and/or ENL. Records will be maintained, including student attendance and assessment data. Parent notifications in parents' preferred languages will be sent by the teachers via iO Messenger. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Teachers in our building have expressed a need for continued professional development in strategies for teaching Entering and Emerging level ELLs. Most teachers feel comfortable 8  Part C: Professional Development working with Transitioning and Expanding ELLs, but they struggle with finding appropriate and effective methods to teach newcomers. During our school's PD time, we will run workshops for teachers of ELLs, which will occur from September through June of 2018-2019. We have over 60 teachers who work with ELLs in our school, and we will design workshops that are specific to different groups of teachers. One workshop will be for first year teachers who require a basic overview of ELL policies, accommodations, and strategies. Then we will move to content-area specific PD for teachers of ELLs. These PDS will help teachers plan appropriate scaffolds and supports to help the ELLs become successful in the content areas. These PDs will be designed and facilitated by our ENL teachers, Ms. Park and Ms. Olsen along with the PD Team. Final PD schedule will be determined based on NYSESLAT 2018 test scores, and the school wide professional learning plan. All relevant professional development documents including agendas and handouts will be kept in our school's Google Drive ELL PD folder. These PDs will be at no cost since they will run during our school's PD time. Teachers of ELLs will also take part in the following online interactive webinars offered by the Fast ForWord Reading Intervention Program. These webinar PD sessions will take place during our school's PD time and will be at no cost. -Build the ELL Brain (45 minutes) -Reading: Effective Literacy Instruction for All Students(60 minutes) -Reading with the Brain in Mind-Focus on Cognitive Capacity (60 minutes) In addition to these webinars, we will offer three 2-hour interactive professional development for teachers participating in the before school Title III program. Records will be maintained including Agendas and Attendance sheets by the ELL Coordinator, Mrs Park. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our Parent Coordinator has written a JHS 185 Parent Handbook, which she submitted to the Office of Translation. She gives this translated parent handbook to all incoming ELLs, and we also distribute it to the parents of ELLs during parent teacher conferences and other school events. In order to recruit students to attend our Title III program, we will send bilingual text messages via iO Messenger. We have used this strategy in the past, and we have found that directly informing parents of this program has been effective in increasing the number of students who attend the program. We will host parent workshops to inform parents of the assessments that their students will take throughout the year. These workshops will occur during the 30 minutes prior to Parent Engagement time on selected Tuesdays. During these workshops, we will offer technology 9 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities support to help parents login to PupilPath and use iO Messenger. We will also teach parents to use Google Classroom, which they can use at home or at the library with their children. We will also host workshops in Spanish, Chinese, and Korean on the following topics: high school application workshops for the parents of 8th grade students in the fall and 7th grade students in the spring. There will be staff members available during all parent workshop times to help with translations. Parents will be sent notifications in their preferred language. All records including agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents' preferred languages will be kept in our school's Google Drive ELL Title III folder and maintained by Mrs. Park, the ENL coordinator. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name Edward Bleeker Borough Queens School Number 185 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Theresa Mshar Coach Christine Olsen, MT ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Chaihyo Park, ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Amanda LeFebvre, ELA Teacher/Subject Area Jessica Mast, ELA Related-Service Provider Katherine Regnell, Speech Superintendent Danielle DiMango Assistant Principal Josefa Sande Coach Danielle Sabino, MT School Counselor Narda Melendez Parent Christine Coniglio Parent Coordinator Jenny Luo Field Support Center Staff Member Na Other (Name and Title) Na C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 5 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics 1  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1522 Total number of ELLs 186 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.22% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Mandarin Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Lang. Mandarin 2017-2018 Program TBE TBE TBE DL 0 0 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 K 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 1 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? iReady/AR: We have selected iReady/AR to use during ELA classes, which assesses phonemic awareness, phonics, high frequency words, vocabulary, and comprehension in literature and informational texts. Using this data, we identified the students who are struggling in the three lower domains (phonemic awareness, phonics, and high frequency words) and who will benefit from Wilson's Just Words during small group instruction time. During ELA classes, teachers will choose to focus on high frequency words that appear in texts that are part of the ELA curriculum. For students who are struggling in the three higher domains (vocabulary, and comprehension in literature and informational texts), ENL teachers provide scaffolded texts (using the chunking scaffold outlined by Aida Walqui and recommended by DELLSS) to help students access higher level texts. 2  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 1. ELA teachers receive regular PD on using iReady/Renaissance to assess student growth and to use the data to plan for differentiated instruction. Ms. Brisotti, Ms. Morizzo, and Ms. Campopiano deliver this PD throughout the year to support teachers' use of this data. 2. A team of teachers have agreed to begin work on these formative assessments for ELLs this summer. This team will create and compile assessments for all modalities and proficiency levels. Once the assessments have been created, this team will develop and provide professional development to teachers of ELLs this fall. This effort will be supported by the ENL AP, Ms. Sande, and the ENL Coordinator, Ms. Olsen. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We will administer the ELL Baseline Assessment in the fall and spring to identify baseline data and track progress. ENL teachers will administer the assessment during ELA or stand-alone ENL classes based on the following structure: Level LRW Book 1 LRW Book 2 (optional) Speaking EN/EM ENL Standalone (45 mins) ENL Standalone (45 mins) Integrated Co-Teaching ELA (15 mins/student, ENL Teacher administers in classroom/hallway) TR/EX ELA Integrated Co-Teaching (45 mins) ELA Integrated Co-Teaching (45 mins) Integrated Co-Teaching ELA (15 mins/student, ENL Teacher administers in classroom/hallway) CO Content Area Integrated Co-Teaching (45 mins ENL Teacher pull out) Content Area Integrated Co-Teaching (45 mins ENL Teacher pull out) Content Area Integrated Co-Teaching (15 mins/student, ENL Teacher administers in classroom/hallway) 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ENL Teachers will analyze the periodic assessment data and share the results with content area teachers. ENL teachers will work with content area teachers to develop interventions that are appropriate for students in each content area. Professional development sessions will be developed by the AP and ENL Coordinator to support content area teachers in using the data to inform instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The academic interventions that we use for at-risk ELLs in grades 6-8 include Wilson's Just Words and Rising Stars ELL Mentoring. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The 2015 NYSESLAT shows that the majority of our 7th grade ELLs scored at the Transitioning and Expanding levels. However, the majority of the 8th grade ELLs scored at the Entering and Emerging levels on the NYSESLAT. Our students who score at the Expanding level, generally reach the required score for Commanding in reading and speaking; however, their scores are lower in the listening and writing modalities. 3  Current Grade Level (15-16) Total Number Entering (2015 NYSESLAT) Emerging (2015 NYSESLAT) Transitioning (2015 NYSESLAT) Expanding (2015 NYSESLAT) 7th 35 9 3 1 22 8th 47 18 14 6 9 When we compared this data to the 2017 NYSESLAT, we realized that the majority of our ELLs in 7th and 8th grade scored at the Transitioning and Expanding levels. Last year in 7th grade, we had 35 students in the Entering and Emerging levels. This means that 14 of our 7th grade ELLs moved to the Transitioning and Expanding levels, but 21 students remained at the Entering and Emerging levels. Current Grade Level (17-18) Total Number Entering (2017 NYSESLAT) Emerging (2017 NYSESLAT) Transitioning (2017 NYSESLAT) Expanding (2017 NYSESLAT) 7th 46 5 11 12 18 8th 61 7 14 15 4  25 Looking at the EDAT, we noticed that 61 ELLs who scored level 1 on the ELA exam are at the Transitioning and Expanding levels of English language proficiency along with one student who scored Commanding. However, we see that once students score Commanding on the NYSESLAT they also move to a level 2 on the ELA. Our belief is that we need to provide our ELLs with language supports and targeted language instruction at the early levels of proficiency in order to help move them to the higher levels of proficiency. In order to provide support for language acquisition we will test ELLs at all levels of proficiency to identify students who would benefit from Just Words intervention after school. This intervention will support our students who struggle with decoding and fluency. Using the data from the EDAT, we were able to uncover a large discrepancy between speakers of Chinese and speakers of Spanish who scored Commanding on the NYSESLAT. We found that 17 percent of students who listed their home language as Chinese scored Commanding on the 2017 NYESLAT; however, 9 percent of students who listed their home language as Spanish scored Commanding on the 2017 NYESLAT. This data shows us that we need to further diagnose the reasons for the lower rate of proficiency among our Spanish speakers and the areas where our Spanish speaking ELLs need additional supports within our curriculum and after-school. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In June of 2017, a team that was comprised of the Principal, Assistant Principals, Programmer, and ENL Coordinator met for a planning meeting to review data that showed the new admit rate for the last three years. The purpose of reviewing this data was to understand how many students and at which levels we should expect to admit throughout the 2017-2018 school year. This helped us to plan ahead to accommodate new arrivals during the school year. Realizing that we struggle with moving our Entering and Emerging level ELLs to the Transitioning and Expanding levels, we reduced the number of students in our Entering and Emerging level ENL and ELA classes. This year, for our stand-alone and ICT ELA classes, we had between 8 and 15 students in each class across all grade levels at the start of the year. This will allow us to easily integrate new students as they arrive. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All ELLs are integrated in the general education program. They receive ENL services during heterogeneous (Entering and Emerging + non-ELLs and Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding + non-ELLs) content area classes using the Integrated Co-Teaching model. The Entering and Emerging students receive additional instruction four periods per week during a stand-alone ENL program as per CR Part 154.2 regulations. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. ELLs in the Mandarin Dual Language Program is serviced by Bilingual Certified teacher who provides services though an integrated co-teaching model in the ELA classroom. Students are grouped heterogeneously with Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding ELLs + non-ELLs. We are putting our focus on ELLs who have intermediate to high levels of English proficiency, so we will not use a stand-alone model in our dual language program. 5  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering and Emerging students receive 180 minutes per week of ENL services during ELA following the Integrated Co-Teaching model and 180 minutes per week of ENL services following the stand-alone ENL model from certified ENL teachers. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes per week of ENL services during ELA following the Integrated Co-Teaching model from an ENL certified teacher. All Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding ELLs also receive an additional 180 minutes per week of ELA instruction from an ELA certified teacher. Students in the Mandarin Dual Language program will receive 180 minutes per week of HLA instruction from a Certified Bilingual Teacher. Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding ELLs in the DL program will receive 180 minutes of ENL Integrated Co-Teaching services during ELA. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Freestanding ENL: All ELLs receive ELA instruction from an ELA certified teacher in English. Students are programmed for and attend a minimum of 5 periods of science, 5 periods of social studies, and 8 periods of math instructed in English by a pedagogue who is certified in the required license area. Teachers of ELLs are trained in theory and strategies related to teaching ELLs. All students have access to technology, bilingual content area glossaries, and dictionaries to foster language development and meet the demands of the NYS Learning Standards. This year, we have hired two new teachers who are dually certified in special education, middle school science and ENL. These teachers are qualified to provide ENL services in the content areas they teach. ENL co-teachers work closely with the content area teachers in order to modify instruction to meet the needs of all levels of ELLs. Co-teachers meet during common planning periods to analyze assessment data and adjust instruction. When ENL teachers provide services in content area classes, they use small group instruction and conferencing to personalize instruction to meet the needs of their ELLs. They also maintain digital conference notes that are shared via Google Drive in order to ensure that content area teachers and ENL service providers are able to share data collected in a timely manner. Mandarin Dual Language: We chose to create a departmentalized program in order to provide our students with a high level of rigor. ELLs in the DL program receive one course in each of the following: Mandarin home language arts, ELA with Integrated Co-Teaching for ENL services, math, science, and social studies. Mandarin Home Language Arts is instructed in Mandarin by a Bilingual Certified teacher. ELA is instructed in English, which incorporates Integrated Co-Teaching, and ENL services are provided by the Mandarin Bilingual teacher. Math is instructed in English and Mandarin. Science and social studies are currently (in 2017) instructed in English only. However, in order to build a sustainable dual language program, we intend to increase the number of bilingually certified teachers in all content areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Newcomer Spanish-speaking ELLs take the Spanish LAB when they enroll. ELLs take the State Math, Social Studies, and Science tests in their native language if they are available. Oral translations are offered to students who can benefit. ELLs in the Mandarin DL Program will take the Chinese Reading Test during the month of May. All ELLs who demonstrate gaps in formal education will take the Multilingual Literacy SIFE Screener. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The learning community at JHS185 is committed to guiding our students to becoming independent thinkers by supporting them in engaging, productive struggle in all content area classes. Our teachers dedicate their professional common planning time to meeting the needs of different learners. Our cycles of inquiry are dedicated to the sharing and implementation of 6  successful strategies that allow all learners to access the content. For the following sub-groups of ELLs, we provide: SIFE: Access to Title III programs after-school and peer tutoring opportunities through JHS 185's Rising Stars ELL Mentoring. SIFE students will also receive small group instruction three times a week from a teacher trained in Wilson's Just Words. Newcomers: Select Nnewcomer ELLs are paired with peer mentors from JHS 185's Rising Stars ELL Mentoring. Mentors and mentees meet 1-3 times per week to work on homework, study skills, accessing PupilPath, building social skills, and learning about American culture. Newcomer ELLs also receive translated tests, texts, and text summaries in their content classes. Students receive differentiated assignments and texts in class based on their proficiency levels. Teachers create scaffolds to support students in writing in the content areas. Developing: Students at the Emerging and Transitioning levels will be supported during small group instruction three times per week. Teachers of these small groups will use iReady/Renaissance data to design skill-based lessons that support these students in their areas of need. Long Term: Students with 5 years or more of services were invited to the D25 Summer in the City ENL enrichment program. We sent letters home to parents (in the home language) of these students, and we also made phone calls to these parents in their home languages. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status: ENL certified teachers provide Integrated Co-Teaching services during content area classes, and they are the point of contact for teachers who have concerns regarding these students. These students are also placed in Regents, CLP or SP classes if they show the potential and ability to perform at the required levels for those classes. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use scaffolds such as leveled assignments, scaffold cards, and peer tutoring. For example: In ELA classes, ENL and ELA teachers modify the EL curriculum in order to allow ELL-SWDs to access grade level texts. ENL teachers meet regularly with ELA teachers during common planning periods to adjust lessons to reflect the needs of ELL-SWDs. ELL-SWDs read grade level texts and interact with grade level materials. Scaffolds and modified lessons allow the students to access these grade level materials. Selected teachers present these scaffolds during professional development time and inquiry cycles to support teachers’ implementation of these strategies and reflection on whether or not they are effective. All ELL-SWDs receive content area bilingual glossaries for native language support. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs (ICT and SETTS) are integrated into general education ENL classes with a special education teacher when possible. Some students IEPs reflect that they should be mainstreamed for ENL/ELA services, so we accommodate those requests. They attend talent, physical education, and lunch with general education students. Scheduling flexibility in content area classes is exercised when students demonstrate their ability to be successful within a less restrictive environment. This is monitored by the guidance counselor, ENL and IEP teacher. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Social Studies teachers have received graphic novels about historical events for each grade level. Select social studies classes participate in ArtsConnection residencies and the classroom teacher works closely with the teaching artist and receives PD four times per year with ArtsConnection. The social studies text book provides resources in select native languages. Students receive native language glossaries for social studies. ELA teachers are provided with translations of the Expeditionary Learning novels in Spanish, Chinese, and Korean when available. Select ELA classes participate in ArtsConnection residencies, and the classroom teacher works closely with the teaching artist and receives PD four times per year with ArtsConnection. Six ELA teachers are being trained in Wilson's Just Words. These teachers will each work with 10-15 students who have been identified as needing word-level intervention. 7  Math students are grouped and paired with English-speaking students, as well as native speakers. Throughout lessons and group work, ELL students work collaboratively with speakers of the same native language. Students receive native language glossaries for math. Science textbooks and resources are available in select native languages. Students receive native language glossaries for Science. Select science teachers participate in Urban Advantage training, which supports teachers in developing literacy skills for struggling readers and writers and ELLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are entering our third year of JHS 185s Rising Stars ENL Mentoring. In 2017-2018, we will be expanding our current program by adding additional peer mentoring periods for the students in the program. Some teachers will also supervise peer mentoring during small group instruction time or lunch periods. Teacher mentors will continue to select students who they feel could benefit from a teacher-student mentoring relationship. Mentors and their ELLs meet once a week to engage in activities that help to build collaborative relationships among students and adults. Finally, we will expand our relationship with PS 21. We will continue our work with 1st and 2nd grade Hispanic male students, and we will pair them with our two returning 8th grade mentors plus eight new 7th grade mentors. We are adding Wilson's Just Words to support students who have mild to moderate gaps in their decoding and spelling proficiency. We will also be restructuring our Title III program in order to increase the number of students we service after school. We noticed that our enrollment severely declined throughout the last school year. In order to better support our students outside of the regular school day, we will work more closely with parents. We are investing in TalkingPoints, a bilingual texting program that will allow us to send announcements to parents of all ELLs regarding after school opportunities. Our Title III program will also consist of after school sessions that we will open to ELLs who are eligible for Wilson's Just Words. After a successful pilot with Middlebury Interactive Languages, we will be purchasing this curriculum support for all Entering and Emerging ELLs. This will allow our students to have access to independent practice outside of school from their home or library computers. Students will use the program during ENL/ELA and teachers will urge them to use the program at home to reinforce what they learned during the day. We have noticed overcrowding at the Entering and Emerging level classes over the past few years. In order to solve this issue, we have divided the Entering and Emerging level classes at each grade level. This will allow for smaller class sizes and fewer changes required when we accept new students throughout the school year. The parents of our Chinese speaking ELLs have expressed interest in a Mandarin Dual Language program. In response to the requests from our community, we have chosen to open a Mandarin Dual Language program in our 6th grade. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. DELLTA Arts Connection: We are entering year 4 of our Digital DELLTA grant. Our ELLs participate in a 25 session dance residency during ENL and ELA classes. The students work with a teaching artist to create dance performances in small groups based on a piece of abstract art that each group selects after visiting The Metropolitan Museum of Art. The students perform their dances for their peers and teachers at the end of the program. Students will begin creating digital portfolios using the Explain Everything app for the second time in 2017-2018. Summer Title III: During the summer of 2017, District 25 offered a program to our long-term ELLs from July 5 to August 10. Students benefited from the following programming: ELA, Math and STEM. We have implemented a club program in our school. All students, including ELLs, have a club period incorporated into their 8  schedules. This allows all students to have access to classes and activities that align to their interests. We are asking teachers to recommend ELLs who are eligible and could benefit from the after-school Title III program. The program this year will be taught by teachers who have been trained in Wilson's Just Words. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In math, students are provided with content-specific glossaries and translated versions of classwork and assessments. Teachers also utilize, as needed, “Support for English Language Learners” documents that are provided with the students GoMath curriculum. In each classroom, word walls are displayed with visual representations and translations. In English Language Arts, students work with Google Classroom in order to respond to tasks. This affords students the opportunity to ask questions and discuss content related materials. In addition, students are provided with helpful websites such as Brain Pop EL, EL tasks, readings and workbooks that support rigorous instruction based on NYS Learning Standards. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language is supported by the use of bilingual glossaries, student interpreters, Google translate, translated text summaries, and translated content area related texts. Teachers also actively encourage and monitor the use of students’ NL. The teacher leaders of the Bleeker Rising Stars Mentoring Program engage in a process of recruiting mentors who show the potential to be mentors as well as speak the home languages of our ELLs who could benefit from having a mentor. The Mandarin Dual Language program supports home language development through the use of authentic and translated materials from China Sprout and a one to one ChromeBook program. The use of the ChromeBooks allows the teacher to personalize her instruction based on the various levels of home language ability. The dual language teacher also works closely with our parent coordinator to communicate expectations to parents. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We use a grade appropriate ELA curriculum to provide English instruction to our ELLs. Books in students’ NLs are also available in the school library and in ENL classrooms. Engaging grade level content area books and graphic novels that supplement and extend the curricula are available in content area classrooms. We use curricula that are developed for the appropriate grade levels and create scaffolds that allow our students to access the curricula. Additional services and resources are developed for our ELLs during our inquiry cycle that is focused on the success of ELLs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We pair newly arrived ELLs with “buddies” or mentors who assist them as they integrate into their class and the school environment. Additionally, we introduce newly enrolled ELLs to the following faculty and staff members: Primal Dhillon, Michael Leung, Josefa Sande, Grade APs Vicky Kouzounas, Narda Melendez, Garry Fleishman, Grade Guidance Counselors Joe Dilallo, Krystyna Debiec, John Santamaria, Grade Deans Christine Olsen, ENL coordinator Jenny Luo, Parent Coordinator Laura Santora, Pupil Accounting Secretary These faculty and staff members are a resource for these students when they face obstacles throughout their day. If we feel 9  that a new student might struggle more than usual, (ex. refugees, students who have moved many times) we assign these students an adult mentor. Teachers take students on outings to the library to become familiar with their new middle school community, which fosters students’ level of involvement in their community. Current eighth grade students speak with incoming sixth grade students to help them adjust to the middle school setting. Former Bleeker students who are currently in high school and college return to speak with eighth grade students to help them transition to high school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Chinese and Spanish are offered to ELLs in 8th grade. Mandarin DL program is available to 6th grade ELLs beginning September 2017. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We are using a self-contained model of dual language instruction. English proficient students and ELLs are integrated for the entire school day. ELL services are completed using a integrated co-teaching model in ELA and a stand-alone model for Entering and Emerging ELLs in small group instruction. Math is taught in both English and Mandarin. Home Language Arts is taught in Mandarin. The remainder of the content area subjects are taught in English. Once we are able to hire more teachers who are certified in bilingual education, we will increase the subjects taught in Mandarin. In math, the teacher structures her class by teaching one week in Mandarin and one week in English. Both English and Mandarin are taught simultaneously. Each day, students have one period in HLA and one to two periods in ELA. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? A group of ELL pedagogues, office staff, parent coordinator, school psychologists, special education coordinator, paraprofessionals, and assistant principals receive yearly training on the ELL identification process from the ENL coordinator. The ENL Coordinator has read and distributed all versions of the EPRG. Using this information, she will design professional development sessions for all ELL personnel involved in the ELL ID process and education of ELLs. Mentors of ELLs receive PD on cultural sensitivity, importance of cultural identity and native language development. A team of ELA and ENL teachers has been selected to be part of a 4 year grant that is being implemented by ArtsConnection. Teachers attend 4 PD sessions per year that prepare teachers to use arts integration in order to help ELLs attain proficiency in English. 0  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our parent coordinator receives training from FACE and she turn keys this training to our guidance counselors to assist ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle and middle to high school. ENL teachers will attend professional development offered by ArtsConnection. The 4th year of the Digital DELLTA grant will provide them with 25 CTLE PD hours. The other ENL certified teachers will receive PD from DELLSS. We receive PD opportunities from DELLSS, and we send content area teachers to attend these PDs whenever possible. Our PD team considers the need for PD for teachers of ELLs, and targeted PD sessions for teachers of ELLs are included within each cycle of learning. Records are maintained by the PD team’s calendar. The Payroll Secretary enters in EIS all outside PDs that teachers attend and a copy of all agendas are kept in the employee’s file. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We use the mandated parent engagement time to hold annual ELL Parent meetings. Our parent coordinator sends home letters in the parents’ preferred languages to invite them to schedule a meeting with teachers to discuss goals of the ENL program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. The letter also asks parents to check a box if they would like to have interpretation during the meeting. An agenda is agreed upon by teachers and followed to help them guide the meeting. Parts of the discussion are student led and students discuss their language goals. This agenda covers the use of PupilPath to help parents monitor student grades, Student Profile to see test scores, understanding of the NYSESLAT and their child's current NYSESLAT or NYSITELL score, and an overview of the curriculum that is followed in each class. During these scheduled meetings our para-professionals, parent coordinator and bilingual staff members are available to interpret. We also use Language Line if we do not have an interpreter available who speaks the parent's home language. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All teachers of ELLs maintain written reports about the student’s current functioning, as well as areas of strength and concern in Skedula. These reports are available for all teachers to view in Skedula. In addition, all parents are invited to the many activities that we offer to parents including large scale family events, parent workshops, PTA meetings, parent orientations, and family trips. Interpreters are available at all parent workshops and orientations. One annual activity that fosters parental involvement for parents of ELLs in particular is our Lunar New Year Festival. The Parent Coordinator facilitates and schedules the ELL Parent meeting times, assigns interpreters, and prepares folders with NYSESLAT score reports, parent brochures, and content area glossaries in the native language. The DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit is utilized if we cannot find interpreters in our school. The parent coordinator also maintains a list of parents who are able to assist with written translations for letters that we send home to parents. 1  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Targeted ELL classrooms have been paired with ArtsConnection for dance instruction and work with group digital portfolios. Rising Stars, a teacher-led peer mentoring program We offer a Title III Summer Enrichment program for our ELL population (see Section A Q12) 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Theresa Mshar, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: JHS185 School DBN: 185 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Theresa Mshar Title Principal Josefa Sande Assistant Principal Jenny Luo Parent Coordinator Chaihyo Park ENL/Bilingual Teacher Christine Coniglio Parent Amanda LeFebvre Teacher/Subject Area Jessica Mast Teacher/Subject Area Christine Olsen Danielle Sabino Coach Coach Narda Melendez School Counselor Danielle DiMango 10/20/17 Na Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Na Other Katherine Regnell Other Na Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 na Related Services Speech Provider Na Na 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q185 School Name: Edward Bleeker Superintendent: D. Dimango The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) Christine Jenny Olsen Luo conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No ENL Coordinator Yes (Viewed Slides) Yes Parent Coordinator Yes (Viewed Slides) Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We consult the HLIS, student blue cards , and the student/parent demographic information that is available in ATS. In addition, our testing coordinator runs the DNLO in order to determine the breakdown of languages spoken by our students and their parent. We refer to these sources in order to determine the amount of materials needed to be translated into the various home languages for dissemination to the families. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 5  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Amoy (Fukienese) Arabic Bengali Burmese Cham Chinese Cantonese Dari/Farsi/Persian French German Hatian Creole Hindi Indonesian (Bahasa) Italian Korean Macedonian Malagasy Mandarin English Pasto (Pushto) Pilipino (Tagalog) Punjabi (Panjabi) Russian Spanish Turkish Urdu 1 0 8 3 1 1 751 0 4 3 1 0 1 2 1 166 3 1 0 1178 9 2 2 5 406 1 11 0.04 0 0.31 0.12 0.04 0.04 29.32 0 0.16 0.12 0.04 0 0.04 0.08 0.04 6.48 0.12 0.04 0 46 0.35 0.08 0.08 0.2 15.85 0.04 0.43 1 2 9 4 0 1 649 18 4 1 1 2 2 2 1 166 3 1 86 1160 13 2 2 5 413 1 12 0.04 0.08 0.35 0.16 0 0.04 25.34 0.7 0.16 0.04 0.04 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.04 6.48 0.12 0.04 3.36 45.29 0.51 0.08 0.08 0.2 16.13 0.04 0.47 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 6  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you Parent / Student Handbook Fall and ongoing to new students Syllabus or Welcome Letters September plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We submitted to Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation in the spring. We will re-submit when changes are made or if a student who speaks another comes to our school. Teachers may choose to submit their welcome letters to the Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Spooky STEM Family Night October interpretation service(s)? Our parent coordinator, staff members, and paraprofessionals are available for interpretation. 7  Math Family Night Parent Student Vollyball Afternoon October SEP Hackathons Twice Yearly Our parent coordinator, staff members, and paraprofessionals are available for interpretation. Our parent coordinator, staff members, and paraprofessionals are available for interpretation. Our parent coordinator, staff members, and paraprofessionals are available for interpretation. Parent Teacher Conferences September, November, February, May Our parent coordinator, staff members, and paraprofessionals are available for interpretation. Winter and Spring Concerts December and May High School Application Workshops September to December PTA Meetings Monthly ELL Parent Meetings November, January, Tuesday Afternoons February to May Our parent coordinator, staff members, and paraprofessionals are available for interpretation. Our bilingual guidance counselor is present in addition to our parent coordinator, staff members, and paraprofessionals who are also available for interpretation. Our parent coordinator, staff members, and paraprofessionals are available for interpretation. Our parent coordinator, staff members, and paraprofessionals are available for interpretation. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our parent coordinator maintains a distribution list that parents sign up for in order to receive emails about events. The Principal makes a weekly phone call home in English, Spanish, and Chinese to all parents who have signed up. We are beginning a partnership with TalkingPts.org that will enable us to send home bilingual text messages in 22 languages for all parents who register. ENL teachers will do outreach in their classes in order to encourage parents to join. All of these methods of communication can be accessed quickly in case an emergency message is necessary. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff members have received A-663. All students who are learning English receive word to word dictionaries and bilingual glossaries to support them in class and also at home. LACs have completed the online training. Each year, the LAC sends an email to staff with the necessary information for accessing Language Line for calling parents. Talkingpts.org allows all teachers of ELLs to send bilingual texts home to parents. When parents register their children, 8  our Pupil Accounting Secretary ensures that an interpreter is present. Parent and student handbooks are interpreted. All ELL notification documents are sent home in the parents' preferred language. Parent's Bill of Rights is distributed in the parents' preferred language when parents register their children at our school. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Parent's Bill of Rights is distributed to all families in their preferred languages when they register their children at our school. Talkingpts.org messages are sent to families in their preferred languages regarding school events and their child's progress in school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys and parent consultation groups are our main source of feedback. During ELL family meetings, we will conduct a focus group of Spanish speaking parents and Chinese speaking parents, which will be led by our parent coordinator and our Chinese language teacher. 9 
