 25Q193 School Name: P.S. 193 ALFRED J. KENNEDY Principal: DIANE TRATNER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Alfred J. Kennedy School 25Q193 342500010193 PK-5 School Number (DBN): 152-20 11 Avenue Whitestone NY 11357 718-767-8810 Phone Number: 718-746-7617 Fax: Diane Tratner dtratne@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Diane Tratner Joanne Genova Laura Koutsavlis, Tiffany Diamond Gina Depperman none none none none District Information Geographical District: 25 Danielle DiMango Superintendent: 30-45 Linden Place, Flushing NY 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: DDiMang@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-7605 Phone Number: 718-281-7690 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens North Field Support Center FSC: Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Diane Tratner Joanne Genova Laura Koutsavlis Gina Depperman Roselle Tichauer Randy Goldman *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ teacher/Chairperson Member/teacher Member/ teacher   Name Antoinette Musella Grace Lombardi Brooke Stergion Nicole Anastasis Christina Pappas Kristy Chan Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ parent Member/parent Member/parent Member/ parent Member/parent Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school's mission statement is: Section 4: CEP Overview It is the belief of the P.S. 193 community that education is the way to build bridges and change the word. All children are bridge builders, who can learn, achieve, and meet high standards of excellence. Given comprehensive and enriched educational opportunities, and parental support, they will be empowered to become caring beings, literate   citizens, and critical and creative problem solvers. With a solid foundation, our students will build strong bridges to a brighter future 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. What makes PS 193 unique is that our school is truly a "family" comprised on students, parents and staff. A partnership is evident between staff and parents, with all constituents dedicated to supporting students academically and socially. We are an elementary school (PK-5) with approximately 590 students in Whitestone, Queens. According to DOE statistics, our student population is comprised of 21% Asian, 18% Hispanic, and 58% White. 14% of our students receive Special Education services, and 10% of our students are ENLs. Historical data indicates that our school population has grown from 534 students in 2014-15 to 596 students in 2017-18. We believe that everything that matters happens in the classroom. Our teachers are dedicated to ensuring that all students succeed, both academically and socially. We are a community of learners, and teachers and staff are always looking to improve their own knowledge and practice. Teachers are engaged in designing rigorous and engaging tasks that include more student discussion. Teacher collaboration through inquiry practice is an expectation. Each year builds on the work of the previous year, supporting our long range vision of improving instructional practices and student outcomes. We began with the use of exemplars in writing. In the 2017-18 school year we expanded the work in writing to include the use of the writer's notebook, aligned rubrics in narrative, opinion and informational writing and "Shades of Meaning" vocabulary. We ended the year with a staff inquiry engaged around the book "Bringing Words to Life", through which the instruction of vocabulary was studied. The Open Court Phonics program was expanded to Grade 2, which resulted in better student outcomes in reading in the early grades To increase engagement in reading, Book Clubs were introduced- first in Grade 5, and then in Grade 4. In math, EngageNY strategies were introduced during math instruction. This year, we will expand upon our work to include: Student-engaged assessment   Units of study in math based on the Eureka curriculum, aligned to Common Core and Next Gen Stds. and that incorporate Algebra for All strategies  Vertical coherence in writing  A year long roll out of the Next Generation Standards  An SEL Team to design and implement a cohesive vision for our school and support positive social/emotional learning and personal behaviors In addition to focusing on rigorous academic experiences, we are fortunate to have an art teacher and music teacher to support our commitment to the arts. We are focused on enriching our curriculum through various residencies that will enhance students experiences in the arts. At PS 193 we provide before school "clubs" for Grade 4 and 5 students, which include Basketball, Cheerleading, Chorus, and Student Council. Through these clubs we provide enriching experiences and student voice. This year, we intend to expand student enrichment opportunities and encourage student leadership. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  22% or our students are Asian. 18% of our students are Hispanic. 57% of our students are White. 10% of our students are ELLs. 13% of our students receive Special Education services. Of those students, 19% are related services only, 60% receive ICT services and 18% receive Self Contained services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our Instructional Focus for the 2018-19 school year remains the same as last year: We will improve instruction and student outcomes by continuing to strengthen the use of formative assessments. We are proud of the progress that we continue to make in establishing a culture that communicates and supports high expectations.. As related to QR Indicator 3.4, high expectations have been communicated to staff, including a system of accountability. Opportunities have been provided for teachers to "own their own learning" through professional learning, teacher team inquiry, the FSC, teacher center and their colleagues. A culture of collaboration has been built amongst our staff where resources are consistently shared, and classrooms are open for inter-visitations that are teacher driven. In addition, systems have been put in place to monitor student progress. Teacher feedback has been targeted and specific with a focus on improving teacher pedagogy. Progress has been evident in providing rigorous, engaging instruction that is research based and yields high quality student work. 5th grade math teachers participated in Algebra for All training last summer and turn keyed strategies to Grades 2-5. Book clubs were successfully implemented in Grade 4 and 5, which clearly increased student engagement in reading, and provided more challenging opportunities. Pre and post writing assessments were reviewed by administration in all genres, with targeted feedback given. Teachers have participated in four cycles of inquiry this year; beginning with support from the teacher center, focused on the 5 Pillars of Reading, and concluding with a whole staff book study around robust vocabulary instruction. Professional learning has allowed teachers to take ownership of their learning to improve ELA and Math instruction. This learning was supported through targeted PD given by administration, the FSC and teacher leaders. Introduction to Inquiry and coaching of teacher teams by teacher center Incorporating EngageNY strategies in math instruction "Shades of Meaning" vocabulary and book study of "Bringing Words to Life"     Running record analysis and strategies using J. Serravallo "Reading Strategies"  The use of the Writer's Notebook  Formative assessment tools using guided reading and conferencing Based on our Instructional Focus, the goals for 2018-19 are:  Support teachers in building capacity in the use of formative assessment tools in order to deepen student ownership of learning and next steps Increase teacher content knowledge in math through professional learning and two inquiry cycles   Vertical coherence in writing  A year long roll out of the Next Generation Standards  An SEL Team to develop and implement a cohesive vision for our school and support positive social/emotional learning and personal behaviors Strengthen the PK experience by utilizing the PK for All Quality Stds.  1   Align the 5 Pillars of Reading to meet the specific needs of students Our Instructional Focus and school goals are intended to align with District 25 DCEP goals. Therefore, a focus will be on developing "Strong Roots" in mathematics and social emotional learning. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q193 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 587 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 15 14 23 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 9 23 23 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 37.0% % Attendance Rate 30.0% % Reduced Lunch 9.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 17.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 58.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.09 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 66.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 94% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 42 40 23 94.3% 7.2% 14.1% 0.7% 21.0% 1.9% 2 0% 6.6 77.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At this time our school strengths relative to Rigorous Instruction can be identified using the following data sources:  NYS Test Data 2017  PPO Feedback 17-18  Advance teacher data   F & P Reading Progress Report, June 2018 I-Ready Summative Data in Grades 3-5, June 2018 Data analysis at this time reveals the need to focus on two specific areas:  QR 2.2 - Assessment practices that inform instruction  QR 1.4 - Structures for a positive learning environment, inclusive culture, and student success Our specific goals, as related to this Framework element are:  Build teacher capacity in the use of formative assessment tools in order to deepen student ownership and next steps Increase teacher content knowledge in math Introduce Next Gen Stds to staff and begin to include in unit planning    Alignment of the 5 Pillars of Reading to meet the specific reading needs of students  Provide a high quality PK experience utilizing PK for ALL Quality Stds., with an emphasis on developing communication and thinking skills Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, we will build strong foundations in ELA and Math through aligned professional learning for teachers that includes deep understanding of formative assessment, resulting in a 5% increase in student proficiency on the NY State ELA assessment and a 3% increase on the NY State Math assessment. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Provide PD to build a cohesive understanding of formative assessment practices, and build capacity in connecting assessment to instructional planning and student ownership. Teachers and paras Sept Admin - June Teacher Center FSC Provide PD to increase content knowledge in math, using EngageNY and Algebra for All strategies. Teachers and paras Sept - June Admin Teacher Leaders FSC Outside organizations Classroom inter-visitations and modelling during math instruction. Teachers and paras Sept - June Teacher Leaders Introduce and unpack Next Generation Standards. Staff Sept - June Admin Increase coherence in writing through vertical analysis in every grade. Teachers Sept - June Admin Teacher Teams Improve students' use and understanding of vocabulary through "robust" instruction based on "Bringing Words to Life" and "Shades of Meaning". Classroom libraries updated to increase student engagement in independent reading and Book Clubs. Students Sept - June Teachers Students Sept - Jan Teachers Admin Continue participation in the Learning Partners Program to share and reflect upon classroom practice and support the development of an inter-school Professional Learning Community PK will utilize the PK for All Quality Stds. with a focus on developing communication and thinking skills Staff Sept - June LPP Team & Staff Admin PK teachers, paras and students Sept - June PK Instructional Coach, Admin, PK teachers  Tier I and Tier 2 Interventions will be provided in small groups within the classroom with a focus on the lowest performing students. Identified students in all grades- Sept - June Classroom Teachers SETSS teacher 5   Leveled Literacy Instruction (LLI) will be provided as Tier 2 intervention to struggling students 4 times per week for 30 minutes.  Orton Gillingham based, explicit phonics instruction will including ELLs & be provided as a Tier 2 intervention to students struggling with decoding 4 times per week for 20 minutes. SWDs, and Lowest 1/3 students  Title III program to support the needs of ELL students in Grades 2-5. ESL Teacher Paraprofessionals All parents Sept- June Classroom teachers Parent Coordinator PTA School Leaders Translatable school website that includes bi-monthly newsletters for each grade that indicates topics, essential questions, and standards addressed for content areas. School website that includes Educational Links to programs such as ThinkCentral, PracTutor, Readworks, and Quizlet. School website that includes information about the Framework for Great Schools. Parent workshops on curriculum based topics (Family Math Night, etc.) to support student learning and parent understanding Parent Orientations 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families' understanding of Rigorous Instruction will be supported through:  Parent workshop night based on parent interest and need  Bi-monthly parent newsletters outlining curriculum, stds addressed and activities for the month  Parent/ Teacher communication Admin, Parent Coordinator and teachers are responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: All classroom teachers for Tier 1; SETSS / Spec Ed teachers; ESL teacher; paraprofessionals trained in LLI. Instructional resources: LLI materials; Orton-Gillingham materials; AIS materials; Professional Development time; Parent Engagement time 6  LPP funding allocation and per session funding for teachers and admin Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, the number of students meeting benchmark reading levels will increase by 2 % in ELA as evidenced by i-Ready MOY assessment and 1.5% in Math as evidenced by i-Ready MOY assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) BOY, MOY, EOY i-Ready assessments in ELA for Gr. 3-5. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The most recent Quality Review indicates that our school is Well Developed in Indicator 3.4 (High Expectations) due to:  Communication of high expectations to staff, inclusive of training, and a system of accountability  Communication of and support for families' understanding of high expectations for college and career readiness Staff communicate and support high expectations to students  Data results from the Scholar Centric Resiliency Survey given to Grade 4 indicate that our students have low ratings in the area of intrinsic motivation, OORs summative data from June, 2018 show an increase in Level 1-5 incidents from 36 to 64. Half of these incidents occurred during lunch periods. This indicates that more focus needs to be placed on QR 1.4 (Structures for a positive learning environment, inclusive culture, and student success) a) Safe and inclusive school culture b) School coordinates social emotional learning, attendance, and youth development for academic success c) Aligned professional development and supports for adoption of effective academic and personal behaviors Through our partnership with "Thrive" we have identified the following priority needs this year:  To provide students workshops that teach resiliency and mindfulness skills  To provide mental health support for school staff  Training for staff to respond to mental health needs   Mental health screening and/or assessment  Linkage of students/families to community services and resources Family Support and Engagement 8  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, we will build strong foundations in social emotional learning through a clearly stated vision for SEL, with aligned professional learning led by the SEL Team, resulting in evidence of school culture that addresses core SEL competencies and evidence of one PL Inquiry Cycle with a focus on SEL, resulting in a 10% decrease of infractions reported on OORs. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? An SEL Team will develop a school "vision" and implementation plan to elevate the school environment . Staff July - June Staff Students Families Students Families A partnership with the Child Mind Institute will provide students workshops that teach resiliency and mindfulness skills. Students Sept, 2019 Child Mind Institute A partnership with the Child Mind Institute will build school capacity to provide mental health resources to students in order to decrease academic, social and personal problems Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator Students Nov - June Child Mind Institute Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator Admin Nov- June SAPIS Worker The "Beautiful Me" program geared to girls in Grades 3-5 will focus on self-regulation and self-esteem. Female students in Gr. 3-5 School assemblies to promote self-esteem, positive behaviors and school citizenship. Students Feb -June Guidance Counselor The School Wellness Committee will address physical and emotional health through staff PDs, family events and a monthly newsletter Outside Organizations Student Council Staff Sept-June SEL Team Students Families School Wellness Committee Student Council will increase student voice and participation in order to support our school vision and positive academic and personal behaviors. One to one connections with specific students, including ELLs and SWDs, and various staff members (including Principal, AP, Students Sept - June Teacher All students Oct - June SBST SAPIS Worker 0  Parent Coordinator, Youth Coordinator,SBST) for students identified as high-need to have consistent contact with a trusted adult. Youth Coordinator Parent Coordinator Teachers Outside organizations Workshops provided to caretakers which supports students personal and academic behaviors. All parents September - June Parent Coordinator Parent communication through various methods including school website, and involvement in attending and organizing events. N/A PTA Teachers Administrators Student Council PK Social Worker N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our SEL Team and our collaboration with Thrive NYC will support parent understanding of our school vision. This will allow us to: include all constituents in the   Provide workshops to parents/families to enhance their understanding of child development  Parenting workshops to benefit parents of students with disabilities or students who display behavioral  challenges identified by the Guidance Counselor and PC (planned for January) Link students/families to community based organizations that provide culturally appropriate mental health resources and services as needed Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Community organizations, PPT members; Parent Coordinator; PTA 1  School Wellness Grant Teacher per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A 21st Century Grant X SIG X PTA Funded X X Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Feb, 2019, 90% of staff will participate in a professional learning cycle to address core social emotional learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PPT minutes, agendas from PL and OORs data will be reviewed in June 2018. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. This year teachers worked collaboratively with their grade team members to ensure curriculum alignment to state standards. They shared best practices through instructional inter-visitations and reflections on feedback from colleagues and supervisors. Various data sources, including student work samples, were regularly analyzed to inform instruction. Teachers engaged in action research to share instructional resources and took leadership roles to facilitate relevant professional learning to increase instructional capacity within the school. The data used by teachers in Teacher Teams were: Student work samples F & P Reading Tracker progress monitoring 2017-18   NYS ELA and Math test scores 2017   Writing Tracker progress monitoring 2017-18  GoMath and math task assessments  NYSESLAT data 2017  i-Ready assessments 2017-18 Data from the 2016-17 NY State Tests in ELA and Math showed an increase in overall proficiency of 7% in ELA and in Math. However, the 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot showed that while we rated "excellent" in closing the achievement gap for ELL students in both ELA and Math, we were rated "poor" in closing the achievement gap for students with special needs in ELA and rated "good" in Math. We believe that the purpose of this work is to improve student outcomes and teacher pedagogy. This school year, we will focus on strengthening our Teacher Inquiry Teams to further improve instruction in:  5 PIllars of Reading  Math instruction  Coherence in writing Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 3  By June, 2019, we will build strong foundations in math through one inquiry study that focuses on building teacher content knowledge and improved pedagogy within and across all grades, resulting in a 3% increase in student proficiency for the lowest 1/3 subgroup on the NY State Math assessment. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will analyze the data of their lowest performing student subgroups and conduct action research to improve targeted instruction for these students. Lowest 1/3 subgroups Teachers will engage in one inquiry study in Math that focuses on increasing teacher content knowledge and improved pedagogy resulting in a 3% decrease in the achievement gap for students with special needs. Lowest 1/3 subgroups Sept- June Teachers Admin Sept - June Teachers Teacher Leaders Admin A vertical team comprised of teachers of ELLs and our ELL teacher will engage in inquiry and share practices to improve student proficiency in ELA and Math Teachers will engage in professional learning, instructional inter-visitations and coaching with the purpose of improving student outcomes in ELA. N/A ELL students Sept - June ELL Teacher Teachers of ELLs Admin Students Sept - June Teachers Teacher Center Admin N/A N/A N/A School administration and Lead Teachers will develop a trusting, collaborative environment, offering support, information, and resources, as feasible, with specific feedback, clear next steps, and provide Professional Development opportunities to support the needs of teachers. Teachers September-June Professional Learning Committee School leaders N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 5  Teacher- parent collaboration will support family understanding of the 5 Pillars of Reading through workshops and conferences. Teachers and the parent coordinator will be responsible for the implementation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Grade Teacher Teams; Administration Instructional Resources: i-Ready training, Open Court training, District Literacy Support Specialist Scheduling adjustments: common preps, Monday and Tuesday afternoon Professional Development time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, there will be a 2% increase in the number of students meeting benchmark reading levels, as evidenced by F & P assessments and i-Ready assessments, benchmark writing levels as evidenced in the Writing Trackers, and math benchmarks as evidenced in classroom math assessments and i-Ready assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Middle of the Year F & P assessments, i-Ready assessments, classroom assessments, and Writing Trackers will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. MOLP feedback from 2017-18 indicate strengths in the implementation of a multi year vision around alignment and infusion of rigorous habits and higher order skills (1.1). A cohesive and aligned professional learning plan was balanced between whole staff and professional inquiry cycles. MOLP feedback also indicates the need to build teacher capacity in the use of formative assessment tools to deepen student ownership (2.2). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school level goals and theory of action will be tracked for progress through the use of systems and structures that result in a 3% decrease in the achievement gap of students with IEPs on the NY State ELA assessment. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional learning will be provided to build a cohesive understanding of formative assessment practices, and build capacity in connecting assessment to instructional planning and student ownership. Teachers and paras Students Sept - June Admin Teacher Center FSC Continue participation in LPP to share and reflect upon classroom practice and support the development of an inter-school Professional Learning Community. Partner with Teacher Center with a specific focus on building a cohesive understanding of guided reading practices. Teachers July - June LPP Team Admin Staff Teachers Sept - June Teachers Teacher Center Admin Support teacher inquiry to build capacity to analyze data, student work and classroom practices, with a focus on student subgroups, to elevate teacher practice and student outcomes Teachers Sept- June Teachers Students Teacher Center N/A N/A N/A Admin N/A  With SEL Team, develop and share a school vision that Parents Oct - June Admin aligns with D25 DCEP Goals  Offer and participate in parent workshops that support academic goals and social emotional learning. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parent Coordinator N/A N/A PTA N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent leadership and engagement in supporting children at home will be implemented through frequent parent/ child classroom learning experiences, and workshops. Admin, Parent Coordinator and teachers will be responsible for the implementation. 8  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional development opportunities available for teachers through Central at no cost. PLC will be be aligned to school goals and action plan. Teacher per session through LPP Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February, agendas, minutes and artifacts from monthly LPP meetings and Parent Workshops will be reviewed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Minutes, agendas and artifacts from PS193 LPP team and Parent Workshops. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parent participation is high for fun family events, SLT discussions have centered on how to bring parents in for more workshops to support student learning. Parents specifically mentioned having difficulty supporting their children with GoMath. We want to address this two fold: 1. Provide educational Parent-Child workshops, such as Parent-Child Math night 2. Provide babysitting for parents at workshops geared for parents only 3. Provide more opportunities for parents to visit classrooms during the day for educational activities and celebrations.) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, we will build strong foundations by designing family workshops aligned to district and school goals, with a specific focus on Grade K-2 ELA, resulting in a 3% increase of students reading at grade level by the end of Grade 2. 0 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide targeted academic workshops geared to areas of need. Parents Provide parent workshops that support students' personal and academic behaviors Parents Oct - June Teachers Admin Oct - June Outside Organizations SBST Information and access for parents about school events and curriculum provided through: Increased communication in different languages, redesign school website to make it easier to navigate to important links and to be more user-friendly; increase use of ‘Autodial’ system to phone parents, increased use of Remind 101, maintain School Bulletin Board outside school’s main entrance, Family Handbook, monthly calendar, Principal and Grade newsletters. N/A Continue school events during and after school day, with increased and improved notification: Arts and Crafts Night, Movie night, parent workshops in curriculum areas and Common Core, Get-Acquainted party in September, Curriculum Fair in May, Breast Cancer Walk-a-thon in Fall, Halloween Dance, Book Fairs throughout school year, Grade- and Principal Newsletters. Additional events of interest to parents may include: International Food Festival and Talent Night, Cultural Dance performances, with translated flyers. Parents Sept - June Parent Coordinator Staff Admin N/A School community Including families, staff, and neighbors N/A Sept - June Parent coordinator PTA Admin Staff 1 Provide flexible scheduling of meetings / events, where feasible, to encourage parent involvement. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We are partnering with Thrive NYC. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Community partnerships, school community, translators. Adjusting schedule of events to meet needs of majority of parents Teacher per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Agendas and attendance sheets for workshops and events will be reviewed in February. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas and attendance sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher recommendation; Reading levels, test data Mathematics Science Social Studies Teacher recommendation; test data Teacher recommendation; test data; running records Teacher recommendation; test data Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Shared Reading/Writing; Orton-Gillingham, LLI; repeated Read Alouds; specific reading /writing strategies; Guided Reading; Thinking Maps; technology; ImagineLearning, RazKids, Starfall; Test Sophistication program Title III Program Charts with simplified language and picture support; content vocabulary; Math games; technology; I-Ready Charts with simplified language and picture support; content vocabulary; Grade 4 teachers support science content through literacy Charts with simplified language and picture support; content vocabulary; Thinking Maps Small group During school day Small groups Before school Title III program LLIprovided during school day 4 times per week for 30 minutes each day. Orton-Gillinghamprovided 4 times per week for 20 minutes per day. During school day Before school (for ELLs) Small groups During school day, and embedded in ELA Small groups During the school day; embedded in ELA 3 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher and PPT referral Counseling and support – discussions, games, scenarios, about following rules, dealing with family issues, getting along with peers, appropriate self-expression, self-esteem. Small groups During the school day 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 7  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 8  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 193Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elmentary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 193Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 0  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 1  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 193Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act ( is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 2  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 3  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 4  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 5  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PS 193's Title III ENL Morning Program will take place before the start of the normal school day for three consecutive mornings per week: Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays from 7:15 am-8:00 am for a duration of 20 weeks or 60 sessions from November 27, 2018-May 10, 2019. Students will receive their instruction in English. One certified ENL teacher will service second and third grade students while another certified ENL teacher will service fourth and fifth grade students. An additional day per week, Tuesdays, will be used by teachers to analyze and assess student work, discuss and revise instructional strategies, create follow up activities, create assessments and rubrics. Translated parent notification letters will be sent home in mid-October to the targeted students informing parents of the Title III Morning Program. Follow up letters will be sent home and phone calls will be made in the home language a week later for any students that did not respond. Once we have a roster of students who will be attending the program, an attendance sheet will be created and each teacher will take attendance on a daily basis. These records will be stored in the ENL teacher’s classroom along with student work in folders. We will be targeting 30 current and former ELL students from grades 2 through 5 and focusing on the four modalities of literacy- listening, speaking, reading and writing. The rationale for this instructional decision is based on the EDAT report comprising of 2017-2018 New York State ELA and NYSESLAT scores for this group of students as well as the Fountas & Pinnell Running Record Assessments. In analyzing these multiple sources of data, we concluded that this group of students needs the most support in writing and reading comprehension in order to elevate their reading and writing levels to meet the benchmarks of their grade level. As students progress into the upper grades, texts become very complex with an increased amount of Tier 2 and Tier 3 vocabulary which our ELLS require teacher supports in order to comprehend. Our targeted group of students would highly benefit from intensive, small group instruction in order to improve their independent reading levels, increase academic vocabulary registers , provide extensive oral language opportunities to discuss and question texts and compose text-based short responses and essays. We will be utilizing supplemental instructional resources purchased over the last 2 years solely for use during the Title III Program and not during the normal instructional day. We will also print online resources as needed (thinking maps, passages, pictures). All resources directly align to the intended instructional outcomes of this program and will only be made available to students during this supplemental program. Students will receive support in word decoding, vocabulary acquisition, oral language development, reading comprehension skills, reading fluency and text-based essay writing. Students will participate in guided reading groups and interactive read alouds based on their reading levels using Treasures Guiding Reading, Fountas & Pinnell Guided Reading and McMillian & McGraw Hill ELL Reading Leveled Library. Research- based vocabulary strategies learned and discussed during teachers' professional learning inquiry work from the book "Bringing Words to Life- Robust Vocabulary Instruction" by Beck, McKeown and Kucan willl be implemented. Vocabulary will be front-loaded with visual support and translated into their native language when possible. Additionally, students will be provided with the approved New York State ELA Glossaries in 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information English and their native language for translation. Students will learn Juicy Words (strategies of Maryann Cucchiara), which are synonyms for everyday words students may already know as well as shades of meaning strategies in order to bolster vocabulary. Teachers will model reading comprehension skills, such as chunking, Juicy Sentences (deconstructing and reconstructing complex sentences in a text), main idea and key details, inferencing, theme, comparing and contrasting, predicting, using context clues to determine word meaning and additional skills as needed based on student progress and individual needs. Complex texts will be scaffolded for students using Close Reading where students will answer basic to complex text-based questions. Choral reading and echo reading strategies will be implemented to develop reading fluency. Students will learn sight words, word families, digraphs, blends and other skills to assist in their ability to decode words they will encounter in a text. Students will also rotate through literacy centers learning with activities from Lakeshore Learning in order to complement the teacher's explicit instruction. Teachers will focus on enhancing students’ oral language exchanges through discussion around a text using linguistic frames and picture cards. We will utilize books designated for the Title III Morning Program titled "Finish Line: Reading for the Common Core State Standards, Second Edition" by Continental Press for grades 2,3, 4 and 5 as well as the “Oxford Picture Dictionary: Content Areas for Kids- Accelerates Academic Language Development” by Oxford in both English as well as English/Spanish and English/Chinese. In an effort to support student learning in multiple formats, we will also subscribe to Open Court's online learning program so students can receive high quality, engaging support in phonics. Based on teacher assessments of students letter/sound correspondence, sight word recognition and decoding skills, we will assign differentiated learning activities to each student in order to bolster teacher instruction in phonics. Open Court provides students with engaging animations and songs to learn letters and sounds. Furthermore, we will subscribe to iReady to provide opportunities for students to listen and read complex texts and answer text-based questions. iReady will provide data on students' performance which will be valuable for teachers as they continue to make instructional decisions to ensure academic success. These online learning programs will be utilized during literacy center rotations exclusively during the Title III Morning Program and not during the normal instructional day. Two iPads will also be purchased for each teacher to use in order to provide visual support for students using various websites and apps related to the topics being explored in instruction. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Teachers instructing the Title III ENL Morning Program as well as all other teachers providing instruction to our ELL students during the normal instructional day will receive professional development throughout the school year to help further develop their abilities to deliver quality instruction using successful, research based ENL strategies. Our Title III ENL teachers will attend a year-long workshop series held monthly on a variety of ELL topics offered by Queens North Field Support Center and our ENL Coordinator/ENL Teacher will attend the ELL Liaison District 25 meetings that are held several times during the school year at no cost to the Title III Program (Dates/times/workshop titles to be included in the narrative upon the availability of the Queens North 2018-2019 PD calendar.) A description of the series of 9  Part C: Professional Development workshops includes: “This yearlong series is designed to provide teachers with a toolkit of strategies and activities to scaffold ELL instruction so that every student is able to participate in academically challenging, grade-level content and literacy instruction. A major focus will be developing academic language in order to meet the demands of the NYS Common Core Learning Standards for English Language Arts. Participants will explore a cadre of research-based approaches to building literacy for English Language Learners in the ENL self-contained, integrated ENL and general education classrooms with a focus on oral language development, vocabulary development, reading comprehension and informational writing. Anticipated Outcomes: - Participants will review current research on vocabulary development. - Participants will design literacy activities based on grade-level texts. - Participants will implement appropriate ENL strategies and supports within literacy and content area instruction.” Information from the above workshops will be shared with our ELL Vertical Team, which is comprised of all ELL-serving teachers from grades K through 5. The ELL Vertical Team meets monthly either on a Tuesday afternoon from 3:15-3:55pm or on a Thursday afterschool from 2:40-4pm. Meetings are held in the ELL Coordinator/ENL Teacher's class in Room 207. Agendas and handouts will be kept in the ELL Vertical Team Binder in the ELL Coordinator/ENL Teacher's class in Room 207. In addition to turn keying strategies and information from PD's, the ELL Vertical Team will engage in an inquiry-style approach to developing our skill sets as ELL educators to impact student learning. We will analyze Running Records, NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, ELA and MATH data through EDAT and see how our ELLs performed. We will identify areas of strength and areas for improvement. We will then determine strategies that can be utilized to improve student performance. At subsequent meetings, we will evaluate how successful our plans were and adjust accordingly. ELL teachers will be able to see and discuss firsthand the skills necessary of our ELLS as they progress through the grades and implement successful routines and strategies that will build through subsequent grades and serve for consistent, cohesive learning. Our fourth grade ELL Teacher, Mary Andrews, will provide professional development to the ELL Teachers on Maryann Cucchiara's teaching methodologies. We will create and revise unit plans/thematic units to incorporate these methodologies. Assessments and student rubrics will also be created to support student learning. The ELL Vertical Team meetings will be essential for our ELL teachers in serving as a platform for the exchange of ideas, clarification of any questions or concerns as well as ensuring that we are all current in our practices and knowledge of ELL Policy. The following are additional professional development opportunities which are offered at no cost to the Title III Program. ELL teachers are offered a listing of PD's in September from the Queens North Field Support Center which they can choose to attend with Principal approval. Throughout the school year, Michael Vespe, instructional coach for District 25, provides Guided Reading professional learning opportunities at our school for teachers to attend. We also have a presenter from Open Court, a phonics program used in our school, who models the use of Open Court with a special session for ENL teachers. `Every Monday from 2:40-4pm, teachers attend Professional Development provided by both the Principal and Assistant Principal or by P.S. 193 teachers on a variety of topics based on student data and teacher needs, including such topics as vocabulary instruction, guided reading, differentiation and small group instruction, using assessments to drive instruction, etc. 0  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In order to better equip parents with the knowledge necessary to help their children at home, we will have various workshops for ELL parents in addition to the mandated ones. In September, a Welcome Night with 2 sessions will be held for all new and existing ELL parents by the ENL teacher, Ayse Altan, with a Chinese, Korean and Spanish translator present. Session 1 will be from 4:30 p.m. to 5:30p.m. and Session 2 will be from 5:40 p.m. to 6:40 p.m. A letter inviting parents to the meeting will be sent home in the home language. Topics at the meeting will include an overview of the ENL program, NYSITELL/NYSESLAT, Title III Morning Program and strategies/routines parents can implement at home and a look at online websites/apps to support student vocabulary and phonics. This event is at no cost to Title III. Additionally, in October, we will host two one-hour long workshops afterschool including a K-2 Reading Workshop and Grades 3-5 Reading Workshop. All new and existing ELL parents will be invited to attend. The ENL teacher, the ELL classroom teachers from each grade as well as translators will present and model strategies for parents to use at home to teach their child how to read and comprehend fiction and nonfiction texts. The ELL classroom teachers per grade are as follows: Kindergarten ELL Teacher Ms. Marissa Felice, First Grade ELL Teacher Ms. Theodora Kousountidis, Second Grade ELL Teacher Ms. Kristen Lauri, Third Grade ELL Teacher Mrs. Ashley Belfer, Fourth Grade ELL Teacher Mrs. Mary Andrews, Fifth Grade ELL Teacher Mrs. Stacey Banner and ENL Teacher for K-5 Mrs. Ayse Altan. In November, we will host an Open School Week where all new and existing ELL parents are invited to visit their child's classroom or the ENL classroom and watch a lesson as well as engage with their child in an interactive learning process. This event is at no cost to Title III. In February, all new and existing ELL parents will be invited to a Winter Publishing Party in the ENL classroom to celebrate the writing of students. Parents and students will engage in a Gallery Walk around the room to read students' work and then the "authors" will share their writing aloud for their parents. Parents will have the opportunity to recognize the hard work of their child and see how much they have grown since September. This event is at no cost to Title III. Finally, in the spring, we will celebrate all the wonderful cultures of our students by hosting "Multicultural Night". Parents are invited to bring in food from their culture to share with the families of P.S. 193. Students and parents are encouraged to dress in traditional clothing from their native country. Teacher's will be hosting workshops for students and parents to engage in fun activities from native countries including Chinese Calligraphy Writing, painting Japanese Blossoms, Egyptian Scroll making as well as many others. A letter inviting parents to the celebration will be sent home in the home language. The attendance sheet will be kept in a file in the ENL teacher’s classroom as well as the Parent Coordinator's room. This event is at no cost to Title III. 1  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Two certified ENL teachers will teach the supplemental program ELL Vertical Team afterschool Title III ENL Morning Program Salaries- 2 teachers @ $55.23 per hour @ 3 hours per week= $331.38 per week for 20 weeks = $6,627.60 ELL Vertical Team afterschool 7 teachers (ENL teacher, K ELL teacher, 1st grade ELL teacher, 2nd grade ELL teacher, 3rd grade ELL teacher, 4th grade ELL teacher, 5th grade ELL teacher) 1 1/2 hour sessions @ $55.23 per hour for 7 teachers= $580 per meeting 6 meetings over the school year= $3,480 TOTAL FOR PROFESSIONAL SALARIES= $10,107.60 -n/a n/a Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) 2 iPads for $520.00 iPads will be used for visual support and differentiation for students requiring tactile, visual or audio supports iReady Learning software licenses iReady Learning is an online program differentiated to meet need students' needs in literacy 2 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Open Court software is a phonics program with videos, audio and visual supports to enhance letter sound relationships, vocabulary instruction and decoding skills N/A A reading workshop will be held to teach parents how to help their child read and discuss texts at home to support classroom learning N/A Travel Other TOTAL 40 licenses @ $21.50 per license=$860 Open Court software license 40 licenses @ $4 per license= $160 Total for Educational Software= $1,020 N/A Other: Parent Engagement Allocation October Reading Workshops for Parents 7 teachers for a one hour workshop @ $55.23 per hour= $386.61 6 translators @ $55.23 per hour= $331.38 TOTAL FOR PARENT ENGAGEMENT $717.99 12,366 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name Alfred J. Kennedy Borough Queens School Number 193 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Diane Tratner Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ayse Altan Teacher/Subject Area Lauren Waters ENL teacher Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Susan Pesso-SETSS/IEP teacher Superintendent Danielle DiMango Assistant Principal Kristy Chan Coach N/A School Counselor Matthew Rothenberg Parent Laura Koutsavlis Parent Coordinator Jennifer Gilmore Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 5 0 4 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 4  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 525 Total number of ELLs 51 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.71% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2 3 K 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 N/A N/A N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 Lang. N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 6 N/A N/A 7 N/A 8 N/A N/A 9 N/A N/A 10 N/A N/A 11 N/A N/A 12 N/A N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses Fountas and Pinnell running records, Open Court High Frequency word lists,spelling lists and phonemic awareness lists and Open Court for English Learners, which has ongoing assessments for speaking skills. Additionally, TCRWP ELA assessments are given at the beginning and end of each reading/ writing unit and checks are done on a daily basis. Based on the analysis of these multiple data sources, our ELLs need support comprehending complex texts, responding to reading using details and proper sentence structures and grammar. They also need to develop vocabulary as well as guided practice in formulating oral responses to text based questions. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 5  The assessment tool that our school uses to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs is Fountas and Pinnell. Fountas and Pinnell is a system of reading levels, and it is what our teachers use for Running Records. It tells us what reading level our English Language Learners are on, (Levels A-Z). We use it to also monitor progress, so we can differentiate the needs of each of the ELLs. Our Entering ELLs who cannot decode and those scoring very low need picture clues and phonics to move them along. Our Emerging and Transitioning ELLs need practice reading and writing - help with main idea and sentence structure, for example. We revise unit plans to address all students. Data is shared between the ENL provider and the teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use NYSELAT data and State ELA and Math data . We also use Fountas and Pinnell Running Records as well as NYC Performance Tasks in ELA. The data reveals similar trends to what we notice with formative assessments, specifically, comprehending complex texts, responding to reading using details and proper sentence structures and grammar. They also need to develop vocabulary as well as guided practice in formulating oral responses to text based questions. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL and classroom teachers meet throughout the school year to gather and discuss data and develop a plan of instruction as well as discuss appropriate ENL strategies and resources to target each child's individual needs. Through small group instruction and one-to-one conferencing by both the ENL teacher as well as the classroom teacher during the student's normal school day as well as the Title III Morning Program, we are able to provide targeted instruction to enable our ELLS to make gains. Our curriculum maps and units of study always include an ENL component with differentiated entry points for students depending on their level of proficiency and also includes differentiated resources (ie. sentence frames, sentence starters, guided reading, oral language development activities, thinking maps, vocabulary cards with visual support, differentiated levels of text) 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The classroom teacher is the primary interventionist in Tier 1 of RTI. Using curriculum and assessments in the classroom as well as any of the other Tier 1 interventions listed on our Response to Intervention programs, the classroom teacher evaluates each student, including the ELLs, to gauge skills in Literacy and Math. Through Progress Monitoring, the teachers are able to note academic gains. The classroom teacher and ENL teacher discuss the outcomes for our ELLs and meet to see if further intervention than ENL is warranted. Continuous assessment and evaluation occur. The fully-certified classroom teachers and our fully-certified ENL teacher will provide the highest quality of instruction by providing multiple entry points to instruction, and using research based strategies and interventions. Assessment data will be shared with parents as well. For any student, including the long term ELLs, not responding to Tier 1 strategies, Tier 2 interventions are put into place. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use the NYSELAT data and State ELA and Math data . This data provides us with focus areas (for example, reading comprehension, math word problems, writing an essay) for instruction for the various groups of ENL students. It shows us areas that our ELLs are successful in so we can continue instructing those strategies during our ENL push-in/pull-out program. It also shows us deficiencies that both the ENL teacher and classroom teacher can plan differentiated and small group instruction in order to improve student achievement. New units may be implemented and/or adjusted to meet the areas of need for our ELLs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the beginning of the school year and on an on-going basis throughout the school year, the ENL teacher analyzes and distributes a report to each classroom teacher with NYSESLAT scores as well as ELA/Math scores, which includes an analysis of student gains. Upon the ENL teacher's evaluation of this data, areas of strengths and improvement are determined and this becomes an area of focus for the ENL teacher as well as the classroom teacher. Students are grouped by proficiency level. 6  Students who did not make gains are looked at more closely to identify gaps in order to design instruction to ensure their progress. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. To ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided for all ELLs, our certified ENL teacher uses both a push-in (integrated) and pull-out (standalone) model. When the ENL teacher pushes-in or pulls-out, students are grouped based on grade and proficiency levels. We have several groups of students made up of students on the same grade or one grade above/below with mixed proficiency levels. Students are pulled out 4 times a week for stand alone time and are supported in the classroom for integrated minutes 4 times a week. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? A detailed schedule is created by our ENL teacher and is also entered into STARS ensuring that students receive the mandated minutes by proficiency level. A report is also received frequently by the ENL Liason indicating if any students are not properly programmed in STARS further ensuring that we are in compliance with the delivery of instructional minutes. Our Entering (Beginner) students are receiving 8 periods (360 minutes) of ENL per week. That is divided into one unit of study in ENL (180 minutes) and one unit of study in ENL / ELA (180 minutes). Our Emerging (Low Intermediates) are also receiving 8 periods (360 minutes) of ENL per week - 180 minutes (one unit of study) in ENL / ELA and 90 minutes (.5 units ) of Stand-Alone ENL and another 90 minutes (.5 unit) can be Stand-Alone or Integrated ENL / Content Area. Our Transitioning (Intermediate) students are receiving 180 minutes - 90 (.5 units) of Integrated ENL / ELA, and 90 minutes (.5 units) of Stand-Alone or Integrated ENL (with ELA or other Content Area.) Our Expanding (Advanced) students are receiving 180 minutes (1 unit ) of study in ENL / ELA, or other content area. Our Commanding (Proficient ) students, who are our former ELLs continue to receive services for 2 additional years. These students receive 90 minutes - (.5 units) of integrated ENL in ELA or content area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in English. The ENL teacher will meet frequently with the classroom teacher to gather data on the student as well as develop a plan of instruction based on the core curriculum being delivered in the classroom. The ENL teacher will be familiar with each grades pacing calendar and units of study in order to plan scaffolds so ELLs can receive customized instruction that meet their needs and goals of each unit as aligned to the CCLS. During ELA instruction, students will receive support in word decoding, vocabulary acquisition, oral language development, reading comprehension skills, reading fluency and text-based essay writing. Students will participate in guided reading groups and read alouds based on their reading levels using Treasures Guiding Reading sets. Small group instruction and multiple entry points will be provided. Vocabulary will be front-loaded with visual support and translation into their native language when possible. 7  Additionally, students will be provided with the approved New York State ELA Glossaries in English and their native language for translation. Students will learn Juicy Words (strategies of Maryann Cucchiara), which are synonyms for everyday words students may already know, to develop their vocabulary. Teachers will model reading comprehension skills such as chunking, Juicy Sentences (deconstructing and reconstructing complex sentences in a text), main idea and key details, inferencing, theme, comparing and contrasting, predicting, using context clues to determine word meaning and additional skills as needed based on student progress and individual needs. Choral reading and echo reading strategies will be implemented to develop reading fluency. Students will learn sight words, word families, digraphs, blends and other skills to assist in their ability to decode words they will encounter in a text. Students will also rotate through literacy centers learning with activities from Lakeshore Learning in order to complement the teacher's explicit instruction. Teachers will focus on bolstering students’ oral language through discussion about the text using linguistic frames and sentence starters to scaffold as well as through picture cards. We will utilize the “Oxford Picture Dictionary: Content Areas for Kids- Accelerates Academic Language Development” by Oxford in both English as well as English/Spanish and English/Chinese. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Newly identified ELLs whose home language is Spanish are evaluated using the Spanish LAB by a fully certified pedagogue who speaks Spanish. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. We currently do not have any SIFE students. b. Our fully certified teachers and our fully certified ENL teacher use the following research based programs with our ELLs who have been in the U. S. schools for less than 3 years - ReadyGen ENL scaffolded strategies, Imagine Learning English. The following strategies are used to help our ELLs move towards proficiency on NYSESLAT, and move up on the State Reading and Math tests. Both during our push-in and pull-out model, the following instructional approaches and methods are used to make content comprehensible and enrich language development using ENL strategies: pre-teaching activities, Total Physical Response (TPR), cooperative learning activities, teacher modeling, use of manipulatives and visuals, peer-tutoring, and lessons with hands-on activities. The ENL teacher introduces high-interest and grade appropriate topics, and supports topics being learned in the classroom. ENL strategies are infused in content area instruction. We will be placing a great emphasis on the learning of academic language. Throughout the day, the classroom teacher provides additional language development instruction, both in language acquisition, and in content areas. The ENL teacher introduces high-interest, and grade appropriate topics, for example, holidays, home and school events, and everday experiences. In addition, the ENL teacher provides support for content area subjects. Through these multi-modality activities, students are offered many and varied opportunities to integrate listening, speaking, reading and writing daily. c. Our school has established that any student who has been in ENL for 4-6 years, and are our Special Needs ELLs, receive ENL and RTI services. Many of them receive SETSS, Speech, and / or Occupational Therapy, as well. The services provided to long-term ELLs are as follows: RTI services, special education support during the day in the SETSS program, and in our RTI STAR period implemented by classroom teachers, cluster teachers and our ENL teacher, in small groups, ongoing throughout the school year. Research shows that small group instruction enhances academic and social performance. Many of our ELLs receiving services for 4-6 years will be coming in for the Title III program, and work in small groups with our ENL teacher to help them reach proficiency on the NYSELAT and improve on their Reading and Math scores on the State tests. d. We do not have any ELLs who have completed 6 years. e. We are carefully following our ELLs who have reached proficiency on the NYSELAT exam. For at least two years following 8  the school year in which a student is exited from ELL status, former ELLs receive at least .5 units of study of ENL (90 minutes per week). Those students also receive extended time (time and a half) on State Assessments, and take the test in a separate location. These students also use the Imagine Computer program. These children are included in our Title III program as well. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies and grade level materials that teachers of ELL-SWDs use that provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development are hands-on materials, picture word walls, glossaries, buddies, small group instruction, and SmartBoards. We use vocabulary apps on our iPads, we pre-teach vocabulary using content-specific vocabulary instruction. We use translated glossaries, and math manipulatives, to foster English language development. We use the Imagine Learning English computer program to support our ELLs. The following components are key to its use as an effective intervention to support all of our ELLs including our ELL - SWDs, and help them move forward; high -quality, scientifically based classroom instruction, with instructions in their preferred language as needed, ongoing student assessment, and tiered instruction. We print our reports and we use these reports to see the progress our ELLs are making in academic areas and English Language development. We reteach as necessary. With this program, the children are provided opportunities to apply skills and strategies in reading and writing meaningful text. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school utilizes the push-in model for ENL support for added flexibility in scheduling, in order to deliver curriculum instruction to meet the diverse needs of the ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. Depending on the student's IEP goals and recommended services, Special Education teachers provide academic support in the Least Restrictive appropriate environment, to support participation and progress in the General Education curriculum. The push-in support of the ENL teacher, enables the student to receive academic and language support during class instruction, meeting their appropriate units of study. The ENL teacher works collaboratively with the Special Education, and General Education teachers to gather appropriate instructional materials with visual supports and cues, to support ELL-SWDs' academic needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The ENL teachers examine results of the Benchmark Assessments as scores become available to us, to inform our instruction. In analyzing the results, the teacher determines which individual ELLs are weak in particular areas. Using this information it is decided how to address their needs with additional help. This may include participation in RTI interventions, use of technology, small group instruction in classrooms, and support for the Core Curriculum by the ENL teacher in either pull out periods or periods when the ENL teacher works with students in their classrooms. The ENL teacher will collaborate with classroom teachers to plan strategies for reading and writing for the ELLs using the ReadyGen program and GoMath. In addition, ELLs are assigned to various RTI programs throughout the school, during out STAR period for interventions, ongoing throughout the year, working on reading, math and writing. We try to help our Entering and Emerging ELLs struggling in Reading and Math by scaffolding the instruction further, based on any weak areas such as math, phonics, comprehension, or writing, with the goal of being able to attain proficiency levels in English and academic subjects. This works well because our ELLs receive additional support on skills they need in a small group setting. All of our ELLs who are in testing grades receive extended time and separate location to take the State assessments, as do our ELLs who have recently passed the test. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will be continuing our Title III Morning Program as we see that ELLs are benefiting from the supplemental support as indicated by the multiple data sources that have been mentioned. Also, we are noticing an increase in the enrollment of Chinese speaking students which may allow us to open up a bilingual or dual language program in the near future. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 9  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs have equal access to all school programs during and after school, and fully participate. Our ELLs have the same access to our Sports and Arts After School Program and Best Prep Program. They also participate in Enrichment clubs with their grade held during the school day. ELLs are offered the Title III Morning ELL program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We purchase the Imagine Learning English program, a research based computer instructional program that teaches children English using 1:1 instruction. Imagine Learning English allows us to differentiate instruction for each ELL while working on vocabulary, phonemic awareness, conversations, letter recognition, listening comprehension and reading fluency. All of our ELLs have been placed on this program and have access to it in their classroom and at home. Progress is shown on detailed reports for the student and teacher, with native language support. All classrooms have laptop carts and desktop computers for student use. The SmartBoard is also used for whole-group and small group instruction. The ReadyGen literacy program used by the entire school has an ENL scaffolded support component. Our LeapFrog system provides a great deal of support for our ELLs. We have LeapFrog interactive books, a LeapFrog leveled library and a phonics series. For our Emerging ELLs, we also use the LeapFrog Language First series, a multi-sensory program for English language development. This program is a series of books, designed to develop English language proficiency, but, in addition, it supports reading instruction appropriate to the child's level of language proficiency. We are also using the Rigby ELL assessment kit and leveled library for Title III. Using the Rigby In-Step program leveled readers, we are reading leveled books and working on comprehension skills in academic subject areas as well. Students will have access to literacy activities from Lakeshore Learning in order to complement the teacher's explicit instruction. Teachers will focus on bolstering students’ oral language through discussion about the text using linguistic frames and sentence starters to scaffold as well as through picture cards. We also utilize the “Oxford Picture Dictionary: Content Areas for Kids- Accelerates Academic Language Development” by Oxford in both English as well as English/Spanish and English/Chinese. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered to the Entering and Emerging ELLs in our Imagine Learning English program. Directions to the activities are given in the child's home language. Directions for the 'Language First' part of the LeapFrog program are also given in a student's home language. We also have books, charts and picture dictionaries in home languages. Multicultural materials are also available. Students are also provided with bilingual dictionaries. Our Open Court ENL curriculum has vocabulary charts that go with each lesson and vocabulary is translated into several languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All of our ELLs are placed in classes based upon their age. Students are grouped for push-in/pull-out services by the ENL teacher based on their grade. For example, ELLs are grouped with other ELLs on their grade level or one grade above or below (4th and 5th grade). When lesson planning, teachers use the Common Core Learning Standards specific to the grade level of students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have a Parent Orientation for the parents of all new ELLs throughout the year, as needed, attended by the fully certified ENL teacher. We have a Kindergarten orientation at the beginning of the school year attended by our Kindergarten teachers, one of whom is a dually certified ENL teacher, and our ENL teacher. We have the Title III Morning Program for newly enrolled ELLs. 0  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer any language electives at P. S. 193, a PK - 5 school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development in the area of ENL is available both through the Department of Education of NYC and through our school, and will be ongoing throughout the year. Our ENL teachers attend monthly ENL workshops offered by Queens North and turnkeys to our staff, for example, "Academic Research Rounds". We review the academic language the ELLs need for development in Math, Social Studies, and Science. Monday afternoons are the times available to provide PDs for all ELL personnel. This includes the Assistant Principal, Common Branch teachers of ELLs, Special Education teachers of ELLs, paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor and Parent Coordinator. These PDs include information about all the new language progressions and the newly amended NYS Commissioner's Regulations (CR-Part 154) changes, as well as strategies and scaffolds to implement when working with our ELLs. We discuss strategies, mandates, and changes to the ENL program. Our AP attends monthly ELI workshops, monthly District AP meetings, and Test Coordinator workshops, that will cover State testing, Gifted and Talented, and School Quality Reports. All of these topics include our ELLs, present and former. Our secretaries attend PDs that give an overview of all school regulations, including those affecting our ELLs. Our Parent Coordinator attends workshops that discuss how to "engage" and "communicate" with ELLs and their families. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our ENL teachers attend monthly ENL workshops offered by Queens North and keep records of agendas from each of these workshops fulfilling 50% of total PD hours. Our ENL teachers will provide ongoing professional development during the school day, at Professional Development meetings, and at Faculty Conferences, to ensure that the classroom teachers receive the 15% of the required Professional Development hours. Classroom teachers are provided with all Professional Development offerings and encouraged to select the PD's they wish to attend to better develop their ENL skill set. We keep records of agendas and attendance sheets for all PD's. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 1  Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ENL teacher sets up meetings throughout the school year to discuss the goals of our program with parents. Additionally, phone calls and additional meetings are set up throughout the year by the classroom teacher, as well as the ENL teacher, on an as needed basis, outside of the mandated NYC DOE meetings. We have translators available for all meetings with parents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The ENL parents of our new admits come to our school for an orientation meeting. During the school year, the ENL teacher meets with parents of ELLs on Back to School Night, Spring Curriculum Night and during our two Parent Teacher Conferences. Translators are available during those times. During the year, there is ongoing contact as needed in the form of conferences, or on the telephone. The ENL teacher also participates in SBST meetings involving all ENL students with IEPs, as well as Annual Reviews of IEPs. We offer activities where parents of ELL students can participate. These activities include Family Fitness Night, Craft Night, Movie Night, and State Testing workshops in various languages. The Parent Coordinator's role is to facilitate the need for translators. We have translators available for all the above activities, in all the languages needed. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Diane Tratner, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 193Q School DBN: 25Q193 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Diane Tratner Title Principal Kristy Chan Assistant Principal Jennifer Gilmore Parent Coordinator Ayse Altan ENL/Bilingual Teacher Laura Koutsavlis Parent Lauren Waters Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Susan Pesso Other IEP/SETSS teacher Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/22/17 6/22/17 6/22/17 6/22/17 6/22/17 6/22/17 6/22/17 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q193 School Name: Alfred J Kennedy Superintendent: D. DiMango The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jennifer Gilmore Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 193Q uses the results from the Learning Environment Survey, as well as, schools created survey, and evaluations to determine the translation needs of our school community. We also use the ATA OTELE report, the Home Language Information survey (HLIS) and the Emergency Contact information, to assess this need. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English 783 86.62 779 86.17 5  Chinese Spanish Korean 79 21 14 8.74 2.32 1.55 70 22 15 7.74 2.43 1.66 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Parent Teacher Conference Notices November/ March/June Parent Orientation Letters for Newly Identified ENL students/Parent Survey/ENL Entitlement, Continued Entitlement Letters September NYSESLAT Testing Letter March/April International Festival Parent Orientation/Meet the Teacher/Open School Week September/October/November How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In-house staff translate. If this service is unavailable, a written request is made to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation services NYC DOE translated letters are available on the intranet, we use staff in our school building for additional languages if they are not available on the intranet or will put in a request to the Translation and Interpretation Unit. In-house staff translate. If this service is unavailable, a written request is made to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation services In-house staff translate. If this service is unavailable, a written request is made to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation services 6  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Meet the Teacher Night/November Open School Week September Parent Teacher Conferences November/ March/June PTA Meetings monthly Parent Orientation for Newly Identified ENL students/Parent Orientation Schoolwide September provide interpretation service(s)? In-house staff translate. If a translator is unavailable, the Parent Coordinator will request a translator through an outside vendor- The Big Word or LIS. If there are still issues obtaining translation services, a phone call is made to the Translation and Interpretation Unit In-house staff translate. If a translator is unavailable, the Parent Coordinator will request a translator through an outside vendor- The Big Word or LIS. If there are still issues obtaining translation services, a phone call is made to the Translation and Interpretation Unit In-house staff translate. If a translator is unavailable, the Parent Coordinator will request a translator through an outside vendor- The Big Word or LIS. If there are still issues obtaining translation services, a phone call is made to the Translation and Interpretation Unit In-house staff translate. If a translator is unavailable, the Parent Coordinator will request a translator through an outside vendor- The Big Word or LIS. If there are still issues obtaining translation services, a phone call is made to the Translation and Interpretation Unit 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In-house staff who speak the home language will make the emergency phone. If a translator is unavailable, a phone call is made to the Translation and Interpretation Unit Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure7  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our Parent Coordinator and ENL Coordinator receive formal training offered by Queens North Field Support Services. In turn, they turnkey this information to all staff members at the beginning of the year during professional development and obtain request for translation services before school events/meetings. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All of the above documents are available for parents in the school lobby, in the Main Office, and with our Parent Coordinator. The Parents' Bills of Rights has been sent home. Classroom teachers will also have the information and phone numbers available. The ENL Coordinator will also make this information available during orientations and parent conferences. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our Parent Survey will give us feedback on the availability and quality of translation services. We will consider scheduling a focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school to gather feedback and best practices on communicating with families. 8 
