 26Q205 School Name: P.S. 205 ALEXANDER GRAHAM BELL Principal: KAREN PIAZZA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Alexander Graham Bell PS 205Q 3426000010205 Pre-K- 5 75-25 Bell Blvd. Bayside, NY 11364 718-464-5773 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 26Q205 718-464-5875 Fax: Karen Scott-Piazza kpiazza2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Karen Scott-Piazza Steven Blum Kara Keppel Karen Scott-Piazza N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 26 Danielle Giunta Superintendent: 61-15 Oceania Street, Bayside, NY Superintendent’s Office Address: 11364 Dgiunta4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 631-6943 Phone Number: 631-6996 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens North Field Support Center FSC: Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Karen Scott-Piazza Steven Blum Amy Kaye Jessica Monaco Jonathan Berghorn Mary Butler *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Denise Cetin Norman Cohn Colleen Keating Melissa Zinzi Terri Shoule Jaqueline Saavadera Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? P.S. 205Q, The Alexander Graham Bell School is a unique NYC elementary school situated in the tight-knit Oakland Gardens community in northeast Queens. Our motto is “At PS 205 Sharing is Caring!” At the heart of this motto is our philosophy that all children can learn. We pursue excellence in education for every student. A shared partnership among staff, parents and students provides all children with a quality education.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Parents are an integral part of our school community and culture. They are one of the cornerstones to our students’ academic success these past ten years. We serve 320 students and families from culturally diverse backgrounds. Students exhibit a strong sense of belonging and belief in education that is enhanced by their love of learning. Our student’s families share this strong belief in education. They believe that hard-work and perseverance coupled with a positive outlook and teacher support is the best recipe for their child’s success in school both academically and social-emotionally. Parents are grateful to our dedicated teachers and staff members. This gratitude is particularly evident each spring when parents host a Teacher Appreciation Luncheon recognizing the faculty for their instructional expertise and tireless efforts. School activities embody a spirit of sharing and caring for the people around us, both locally and globally. Among our many school initiatives, one of which we are most proud is our Service in Schools Program. The past eight years have seen a growing involvement with local and global service projects that promote citizenship, stewardship, and environmental awareness and responsibility. Service projects are spear-headed by 5 thgrade Student Leaders and teachers. Programs include the annual Scholastic Reading Club Great Bedtime Story Pajama Drive and district wide service community project, The Ronald McDonald House. Last year we joined all the other D26 schools in collecting food and toiletries for families who are using the Ronald McDonald program to support their loved ones during times of extended illness or hardship. Our robust science program incorporates STEM based inquiry learning, both inside and outside the classroom for students in kindergarten through 5th grade. For the 2nd year select fifth graders enjoyed an educational week in Reading, Vermont through the "Farm For City Kids" program. Through this program students experienced farm life including taking care of animals (cows, horses, and chickens), tapping trees for sap to make maple syrup and participating in team building activities. Family STEM nights have proven to be an exciting addition to our hands-on science program. Remarkable submission of 5th grade science projects were selected to be showcased at the NYC Science Expo. Favorite student activities include our teacher-led boys’ and girls’ basketball team and cheer-leading squad. Families love being spectators at these inter-school games and are our biggest cheerleaders! The Dancing Classrooms Program will continue for another year through the generous support of the Project Boost grant funded by Senator Avella. This program has been successful in teaching our students ballroom dance and proper dance etiquette. This will be our fifth year participating in this program. Once again this past year our students participated in the Colors of The Rainbow Team Match, where they won a silver award. Our entire school community is proud to call P.S. 205Q home. As a recipient of the 2014 National Blue Ribbon Award, we continue to strive for excellence. At PS 205 everyone learns that "sharing is caring" and that we all have a responsibility to make the world a better place. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Academic intervention services will be provided to students in grades 4 and 5 who scored a Level 1 or Level 2 on the 2018 NYS ELA and Math exams. Through ICT and SETTS periods students are being provided with additional reading, writing and math support to help students achieve proficiency in ELA and mathematics. The total number of ELLs who were tested on the 2018 NYS ELA and Math exams is less than 10. These students will continue to receive mandated services. 0  SWDs in grades 3-5 who were tested on the NYS ELA exam: 12 out of 33 scored a level 3 or 4. SWDs in grades 3-5 who were tested on the NYS Math exam: 22 out of 33 scored a level 3 or 4. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework for Great Schools - Area of Progress: Collaborative Teachers, Rigorous Instruction, Effective School Leadership, and Trust The professional learning path of “Collaborative Learning through Peer Inter-Visitation” engages teacher teams in grades K- 5 to support best teaching practices through peer inter-visitations in a vertical grade level model. Through teacher-driven observation, teachers engage their peers in gathering and analyzing classroom data to improve instruction and student academic and social emotional growth. Framework for Great Schools - Area of Focus: Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers P.S. 205Q School-wide Instructional Focus 2018-2019 Students will be engaged in developmental writing tasks designed to move them along a continuum of grade level expectations to produce clear and coherent writing across three genres of writing: opinion/argument, information and narrative. Students will also be engaged in strengthening their independent reading skills supported through teacher feedback via one on one conferencing. We will continue to support teacher-led peer inter-visitations on grade level and vertical teams as a structure to enhance collaboration and trust. This structure encourages continuous instructional expertise at the school level. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q205 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 325 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 23 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 28.0% % Attendance Rate 24.3% % Reduced Lunch 4.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 20.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 28.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.21 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 75.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 99% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 8 8 96.0% 2.8% 17.8% 1.8% 44.3% 5.5% 0 6% 6.7 83.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. our End of Year (EOY)analysis on the NYC ELA Fall Benchmark 2017 as compared with the ELA Spring 2018 Benchmark demonstrates a 9.6% increas in overall improveent in the area of : writing to Sources, sor students in grades 3, 4, 5. As part of our instructional focus, we will continue to concentrate on Writing to Sources: Students red grade-level text and make statement that they support using details. Students write about characters describing how they relate to each other in the text. Students analyze events and actions, determine the effect of language on aspects of text, and describe the importance of story elements. Students also communicate their understanding by producing coherent writing that demonstrates grade-level English grammar and use. 2. The 2017-18 School Guide of the Framework for Great Schools reports that the results of the NYC School Survey is above the city average in the areas of Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership, Strong Family-Community Ties, and Trust. In the area of Rigorous Instruction our results are -0.29 compared to the city average. Although we are still meeting standards, one of our school's instructional priorities is to increase the level of quality in all academic tasks that will enhance the student's academic achievement. Results of the NYS ELA exam demonstrates that although students in grade 3 2017-18 scored 73.5% Level 3&4 (above the citywide average) there is still work to do in increasing the right amount of AIS support for students who are now in 4th grade and our 3rd grade is an area of focus. The anticipated item-skills analysis of the 2018 NYS ELA Exam will be used to support instructional program recommendations for groups of students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, students in grades 3, 4, and 5 will demonstrate an overall 10% increase in performance as measured by the results of writing response questions, writing to sources on the NYS ELA Exam. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will use Common Core-aligned instruction across subjects, and require students to ground reading, writing, and discussion in evidence from text. All Teachers Daily, Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Principal, data specialist, teachers Teacher resources include:  CIPL Professional Learning Series: Reading With Power and Passion  The Reading Strategies Book by J Seravallo  The Writing Strategies Book by J Servallo  Teachers will incorporate the Writing Pathways: Performance Assessments and Learning Progressions, Grades K-8 , by Lucy Calkins. The Writing Learning Progression will help track students’ progress across three kinds of writing: opinion/argument, narrative and information , locating each student’s current level and determining the next steps the student should take to 1. enhance their writing skills and aptitude and 2. realize that lessons learned in all three types of writing can transfer across all types of writing. Students in grades K-5 will be immersed in Teachers’ College Units of Study in Opinion/Argument, Information, and Narrative Writing A Common Core Workshop Curriculum, Grades K–8 that supports writing expectations per grade level, and uses performance tasks within each unit that assess opinion writing, narrative writing, and informational writing to:  - foster high-level thinking, including regular chances to synthesize, analyze, and critique - develop and refine strategies for writing across the curriculum - support greater independence and fluency through intensive writing opportunities 4  - include strategic performance assessments to help monitor mastery and differentiate instruction and - provide a ladder of exemplar texts that model writing progressions across grades K–8 Students in need of academic support within Tier 2 (RTI) will be provided with intensive reading instruction in a small group setting. Students in need of academic support within Tier 3 (RTI) will receive individualized, intensive intervention in reading, using the Wilson Fundations program. Teacher Inquiry Teams identify at-risk students as determined by the writing benchmark assessments and include UDL tasks/activities that support student learning modality to meet the demands of the CCLS writing standards. Parent workshops will include Literacy Workshops to address CCLS writing requirements that will promote coherent writing that demonstrates grade level English grammar and use. Teacher teams will share best practices in creating/modifying writing lessons that address the following CCLS: ● Write arguments to support claims in an analysis of substantive topics or texts, using valid reasoning and relevant and sufficient evidence. ● Write informative/explanatory texts to examine and convey complex ideas and information clearly and accurately through the effective selection, organization, and analysis of content. ● Write narratives to develop real or imagined experiences using effective technique, well-chosen details, and well-structured event sequences. ● Produce clear and coherent writing in which the development, organization, and style are appropriate to task, purpose, and audience. ● Develop and strengthen writing as needed by planning, revising, editing, and rewriting. All Teachers Daily, Sept. Principal, data specialist, teachers 2018 – June 2019 Fall 2018, Winter 2018, and Spring 2019 Fall 2018, Winter 2018, Spring 2019 Principal, teachers, data specialist, and parent coordinator Principal, teachers, data specialist Principal, parent coordinator All Teachers 5  Teacher Teams will share best strategies that support independent reading with an emphasis on teacher feedback via one on one conferencing. Teacher Team Checkpoints are included in the 3-4 six week inquiry cycles beginning in October. Each cycle includes a Beginning of Cycle (BoC) Data Capture -Needs Assessment in Google Drive and a End of Cycle Data Capture (EoC) - where student growth is captured and grade level teacher teams share results and impact of the cycle. Periodic assessment of writing (Pathways to Writing) at the beginning and end of each writing cycle (3-4 times per year). All teachers MOTP via the cycles of observations in the fall, winter, and spring will provide trends and ensure that teacher practice support school priorities in: social emotional learning, student academic achievement, and teacher collaboration. Interim Focused Gallery walks provide an opportunity to build cohesion in classroom environment that supports our school's priorities. All teachers Oct-Dec Jan-Mar Apr-May 2019 Oct-Dec Jan-Mar Apr-May 2019 Oct-Dec Jan-Mar Apr-May 2019 Oct-Dec Jan-Mar Apr-May 6  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During our monthly Teaching and Learning Community Days (TLCs) families will have the opportunities to observe their children during the school day to strengthen their knowledge of our instructional practices that promote rigor. The parent coordinator and principal will continue to facilitate conversations with families during monthly Book Talks.  Parent workshops on how our Social Emotional Learning (SEL) impacts student achievement.   Schools Website provides current school news, updates, and information about parent events. SEL Info-Hub is a designated area wherein SEL information, NYS SEL Benchmarks, and NYS Standards are made available to all stakeholders. Exemplary student reflection logs are hihg-lighted for teachers, parents, students. The Student Response to Learning Logs (SRLs). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monday professional development time will be used for teachers to score and analyze student results that will define instructional next steps and goals for students. Teacher teams will assess student writing using the Writing Pathways: Performance Assessments and Learning Progressions- checklist and rubrics. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of students will make progress in the mid-year unit of writing as measured by the genre specific post assessment in each grade (K-5). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Genre specific "Pathways to Writing" post writing unit assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Framework for Great Schools Report 2018 indicates that based on this year's Learning Environment survey, our results show that parent involvement at our school is 95% (positive responses). Our 2017 Quality Review rating for QR indicator 1.4 High Expectations is Well Developed. Findings show that the school consistently provides a positive learning environment, inclusive culture ad opportunities for student success. An area of priority is to maintain and increase the level of: 1. Rigorous instruction aligned to the CCLS shifts in literacy and math by evaluating current pedagogical practices and curriculum; and 2. Social Emotional Learning by creating "Classroom Pacts" that promote a favorable classroom environment by ensuring equity of student voices and encouraging respect for all on a daily basis. As evident in our school’s high participation rate at all school functions/activities, students are actively involved and enjoy a variety of after school activities that promote well-being, provide academic support services, and support art and writing. Approximately 50 students attend our Self-Sustaining After School Program that includes programs such as 'Learn Spanish", "Arts and Crafts", "Gym Games" and "Computer Coding" just to name a few. Additionally, approximately 100 students and their families attend our annual Family STEM night that features hands-on STEM activities for children. This past year's STEM evening, “STEM Design and Engineering Challenge” took place in January, where every student from pre-k through fifth grade was invited to participate in their grade specific challenge. Our school’s motto, “Sharing is Caring!” will continue to emphasize The Six Pillars of Character: Trustworthiness, Respect, Responsibility, Fairness, Caring and Citizenship. All Service in Schools projects invites children in pre-K to grade 5 to participate in activities that encourage responsibility and promotes citizenship through service to others. PS 205 has been designated a 2018 "Respect for All" school where many of our social emotional learning programs are embedded in everyday learning for children and adults. Our "Student Helper" program invites students in grades 3 to 5 to assist in helping and supporting the lunchtime and recess periods. Student Helpers are expected to uphold the PS 205 Cafeteria Terrier Pact and the six traits it represents: To be...friendly, helpful, kind, polite, respectful, and responsible. All classes create a Classroom Pact that represents how students want to feel at school everyday, and 8  this year we will seek to enhance our social emotional learning (SEL) work by engaging in student activities and learning via the RULER program and Mood Meter. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By Spring 2019, 100% of students will be engaged in SEL via the use of Class Pacts and the Mood Meter (RULER) that will favorably impact student social emotional learning as measured by a decrease in OORS reports. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All students will participate in ongoing Service in Schools projects that promote citizenship and responsibility which will include: - Student Service Leaders in grades K-5 and - Parents as Service Partners Service Projects will include, but not limited to: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students, teachers and parents Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Grade Level Lead Teachers, Principal, Parent Coordinator, Data Specialist - Penny Harvest - Toys for Tots - Scholastic Pajama Drive - Ronald McDonald House Our school’s Kindness Committee will continue to foster a deep understanding of caring and individual responsibility to others by: Students, teachers and parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Grade Level Lead Teachers, Principal, Parent Coordinator, Data Specialist - Reciting the Kindness Pledge on a weekly basis during morning announcements - Engaging students during Kindness Hour, where students and staff share random acts of kindness and brainstorm ideas that enhance kindness towards others such as our “Buddy Bench” located in the school yard to encourage student friendships. All students in grade 5 will participate in the Dancing Classrooms Program. Dancing Classrooms uses a curriculum-based teaching approach to achieve social awareness and build self-esteem. Students are taught the vocabulary of various contemporary social dances in a classroom setting. 5 th grade students, teachers and parents December 2018 – March 2019 Music teacher, 5 th grade teachers, principal, data specialist 0  Parents will be invited to participate in the Dancing Classrooms “parent workshops” designed to promote confidence and core values of respect, compassion and creating a safe space. School Spirit Days will engage students and staff to celebrate our school’s familial culture by participating in fun activities that promote collegiality, trust and love of school community. All students, teachers and parents Sept. 2018 – June 2019 PE Teacher, Grade Level Teachers, Principal, Parent Coordinator, Data Specialist 1 Grade Level Lead Teachers, Principal, Parent Coordinator, Data Specialist Teachers, Principal, Parent Coordinator, Data Specialist Nov. 2018 and Mar. 2019 Sept. 2018 – June 2019 School Spirit Days include: Pajama Day, Crazy Hair Day, Favorite Sports Team Day, Dress Like The Rainbow Day, Crazy Sock and Shoes Day, All Mixed-Up Day, Terrier Blue and Gold Day Family Spirit Activities: Family STEM Night  Harvest Festival  Halloween Party   Taste of Culture Night    Alumni Day  Dancing Classrooms - Parent Engagement Evening Family Fitness Night Field Day ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Student Led Parent Conferences (SLPC): PS 205's goal is to build student ownership and accountability by empowering students to articulate their learning and foster great family partnerships. All students, teachers, and parents PE Works will continue to provide a full time physical education teacher to work alongside our classroom teachers to enhance the overall academic and physical well-being of our students and provide support to our teachers on best instructional practices in physical and health education. In support of the DOE's Equity and Excellence initiatives all students will participate in all school functions. English language learners will have the opportunity to attend school functions with a school buddy or mentor if they wish. All students, teachers, and parents  All students, teachers, and parents Sept. 2017- June 2018 Students,Teachers, Principal, Parent Coordinator, Data Specialist ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Social Emotional Learning is anchored to our growth mindset philosophy that all children should have a positive and pleasant learning experience supported by: School Pact   Classroom Pacts  Terrier Cafe Pact (Lunchroom Etiquette/Student Helpers)  The 7 Habits of Happy Kids Program  Bi-weekly Student Reflection Learning Logs (SRLs) in grades 3-5. S.O. led Rubik's Cube Club Stress Management PL for Teachers  NYPD Anti-Bullying and Stranger Student Presentations  NED Anti-Bullying Assembly   Resiliency Workshop for Students   PS 205 Respect For All Art Garden  Terrier Tokens  New for 2018-2019 "Beautiful Me" character development program for girls in grades 3 - 5 SEL Parent, Student, and Teacher Info-Hub   Parent SEL Newsletter  Student SEL Focus Group 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. During our monthly Teaching and Learning Community Days (TLCs) families will have the opportunities to observe their children during the school day to strengthen their knowledge of our instructional practices that promote rigor. The parent coordinator and principal will continue to facilitate conversations with families during monthly Book Talks. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Project Boost funding will support the Dancing Classrooms Program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Winter 2019 student satisfaction survey will be used to assess student engagement in school related activities and functions. An end of year survey will show a 10% increase in improved overall satisfaction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Satisfaction Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide indicates an overall 98% positive response rating in Peer Collaboration. That is seven percent higher than the citywide average. Teacher Teams will continue to engage in collaborative inquiry practice that impacts student learning for our SWDs, ELLS, and any student not meeting grade level expectations. 2017 Quality Review results indicate a proficient rating in QR indicator 4.2 – Teachers engage in collaborative practice using the inquiry approach to improve classroom practice. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will participate in professional learning cycles that support rigorous instruction that will enhance CCLS lessons to meet the needs of all learners as measured by a 1% increase in overall teacher level of satisfaction on the Learning Environment Survey. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Using Leverage Leadership , by Bambrick-Santoyo, teachers will anchor their professional collaborations around seven core areas of school leadership and engage in vertical grade level teacher team work with a focus on student learning, especially in the areas of writing and reading, with an emphasis on reading conferencing by employing the following instructional and cultural levers: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Principal, data specialist 1. Data-driven instruction 2. Observation and feedback 3. Instructional planning 4. Professional development 5. Student culture 6. Staff culture and 7. School Leadership Team Grade level teacher teams meet regularly to discuss how to improve their instructional techniques for all students. Teachers will continue to attend the QN Borough Field Support Center professional learning opportunities to refine their teaching practice to meet the needs of learners by designing challenging instruction. Teachers will share best practices during designated PL Mondays. Teachers Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Principal, data specialist Teacher teams will hold a grade level parent workshop with an emphasis on Common Core expectations and strategies to support parents in their work with children at home. Teachers Winter 2018 and Spring 2019 Principal, data specialist, parent coordinator Teacher Teams will identify ELL students or SWD's who may require additional support via the PPT (Pupil Personnel Team). 5 Teachers and parents Fall 2018 – June 2019 Principal, lead teachers, data specialist Teachers Jan. 2019 and May 2019 Principal, lead teachers, data specialist Teacher Leaders will provide professional development to support teachers in developing content knowledge and strategies to guide instructional improvements in the school, with an emphasis on Independent Reading, Feedback, Mathematical Discourse and Physical Education. Teachers incorporate a 30 minute independent reading block for students to practice skills and strategies taught during reading workshop mini-lessons. During the independent reading block, teachers utilize conferencing, strategy lessons and guided reading as a means of providing individualized feedback to students. Vertical grade level teacher teams participate in at least two peer inter-visitations with a focus on formative assessment. Analysis of trends/patterns in the area of 3c (engaging students in learning) via MOTP/observation cycles will provide data to confirm that professional learning impacts teacher practice and advances student learning. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During our Teaching and Learning Community Days (TLCs) families will have the opportunities to observe their children during the school day to strengthen their knowledge of our instructional practices that promote rigor. The parent coordinator and principal will continue to facilitate conversations with families during monthly Book Talks. An Introduction to the Next Generation Standards will be offered to families as a way to begin conversations about the expectations of the new standards adopted by the NYS Education Dept. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Diem days are allocated for grade level teacher teams to collaborate and discuss areas of strength and areas of need in their teaching practice.Per session is allocated for teachers to plan and prepare training sessions for all colleagues with a focus on student work gap analysis and next steps. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 6  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-year 2018-19 teacher survey indicating a level of satisfaction in collaborative teacher teams will be compared to end of year 2017 survey results. June 2019 survey results will demonstrate a 1% increase in an overall level of satisfaction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid-year and end-year teacher satisfaction survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-18 School Quality Guide indicates a 98% positive response in the framework element: Effective School Leadership - Instructional Leadership. Across the school Teacher Teams engage in organized, inquiry-based collaborations to evaluate assessment data and student work and make effective and collaborative instructional decisions. The work of teacher teams has resulted in the promotion of school goals, school-wide instructional coherency, improved pedagogy and progress towards goals for groups of students. Continue planning around inter-visitation professional development sessions systems to include a schedule of peer-inter-visitations on pre-determined days for all teachers in grades K-5. QR Indicator 4.1 Observe teachers using the: ● The Framework for Great Schools calls upon schools to reflect upon and refine teaching practices to prepare all students for college and careers. ●Teacher Leaders on track for administrative level work will be employed to support and help refine classroom practices to incorporate pedagogical strategies aligned to the school’s instructional focus: Students will be engaged in developmental writing tasks designed to move them along a continuum of grade level expectations to produce clear and coherent writing across three genres of writing: opinion/argument, information and narrative, that promote college and career readiness. ● The School Leadership Team will continue to have input into all aspects of school climate and promote school policies that ensure a safe, nurturing and rigorous learning environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will support all teachers in employing Teachers' College Writing Workshop strategies to improve their classroom instruction as measured by a 10% increase in the number of students attaining performance levels 3 and 4 on the Spring 2019 Benchmark Assessment when compared with the results from the Fall 2018 Baseline. 8  9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The principal will conduct the ongoing short/formal observations and evaluate the evidence collected against Danielson’s Framework for Teaching . Teachers Sept- Dec. 2018 and Principal, Lead Teachers Jan- Apr 2019 Teachers Sept. - Dec. 2018 and Principal, Lead Teachers Principal, Teachers Jan. - June 2019 Sept.- Dec. 2018 and Jan. - June 2019 Teacher Teams will share successful instructional practices to meet the needs of all students, with a focus on writing by using the results of the Writing Pathways: Performance Assessments and Learning Progressions for all three types of writing: opinion/argument, narrative and information. Teachers Grade Level teacher Teams will engage in curriculum unit planning with an emphasis on designing challenging instruction in mathematics and creating standards-based units of study in ELA guided by the work of the Learner-Centered Initiative (LCI) research-based project that includes:  Assessment diversity and authenticity  Learning opportunities that promote student engagement within a sequential structure for units in the form of a curriculum map and  Dispositional standards that support the CASEL framework for learning Parent workshops will promote family involvement in school activities and functions. Parents and guardians Sept.- Dec. 2018 and Principal, teachers, data specialist, and parent coordinator English language learners and SWDs will be included in monthly Principal student interview groups to give voice to students to share their school experience and to encourage students to provide suggestions for other types of activities that they would like to be involved in. Jan. - June 2019 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During our monthly Teaching and Learning Community Days (TLCs) families will have the opportunities to observe their children during the school day to strengthen their knowledge of our instructional practices that promote rigor. The parent coordinator and principal will continue to facilitate conversations with families during monthly Book Talks. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Instructional resources will be added as needed throughout the year. ● Per Diem days are allocated for grade level teacher teams to collaborate and discuss areas of strength and areas of need in their teaching practice . ● Per session is allocated for the teacher teams to participate in training /workshop sessions after school that supports Danielson’s Framework for Teaching . Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will employ Teachers' College Writing Workshop strategies to improve their classroom instruction as measured by a 3% increase in the number of students attaining performance levels 3 and 4 on the MOY (middle of year) On Demand Writing Assessment when compared with the results from the Fall 2018 Baseline.Specifically in the areas of structure, development, and conventions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. On Demand Writing Assessments and Fall 2018 Baseline. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-18 School Quality Guide indicates a 95% favorable response rate. Strength: Our School Leadership Team and PTA are strong and valuable forums for parent voices that promote a spirit of collaboration and allow for meaningful conversations around student achievement and overall well-being. Need: Due to a high percentage of working parents, our priority is to look for ways to encourage parent participation by providing alternate time slots for meetings and workshops that may increase interest for these families. Based on this data, we will continue to offer students extracurricular activities during a self-sustaining after school program that affords families with alternative child-care and supports student’s academic and social well-being through organized activities. 2017-18 parent participation rates:  40% increase in parent participation at PTA meetings.  98% of all parents in grade K-5 participated in our second year of Student Led Parent Conferences.  45% of parents/families attended our STEM evening.  During our Teaching and Learning Community Days (TLC):Harvest, STEAM, Book of the Season, and Daily Learning we have at least 45% of parents in attendance per TLC day. Our goal for this year is to continue to maintain and increase attendance at our PTA meetings. In collaboration with our PTA, our school will once again host a Taste of Culture evening this March 2019 that will encourage all families to contribute, plan and facilitate a fun evening for all members of our school community. Our family events include Family Fitness Night, STEM Night, District STEM Night, Vendor Night and Family Skate Days. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 50% increase in parent engagement and satisfaction in SEL parent -student workshops as measured by the results of the fall and spring PS205 parent SEL survey. 2  3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Self-Sustaining After School Program offers families and their children an alternative child-care program at the school level that includes the arts, sports and a Spanish language program for students in Pre-K to 5th grade In order to promote the learning successes of our students, “PS205 Teaching and Learning Days” will take place wherein parents and families are invited into school for an hour of learning. During this time, parents and guardians are welcome to sit in on a morning of learning in their children’s classes. By showcasing everyday learning experiences, parents can better understand some of our teaching practices that promote student engagement, and equity of student voices. We will continue to offer these “Wondrous” teaching and learning days to further advance parent engagement. Our Teaching and Learning Days will include: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students Daily Lead Teacher, Principal Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Parents Monthly-October Principal, SLT, parent coordinator 2018 – June 2019 Marvelous Mondays Terrific Tuesdays Wondrous Wednesdays Thrilling Thursdays Fantastic Fridays SLT and PTA members will engage in activities that support family partnership programs as defined by Epstein’s Framework of Six Types of Parent Involvement: Parents Monthly Sept. Principal, SLT, PTA, parent coordinator Type 1 – Parenting Type 2 – Communicating 2018 – June 2019 4  Type 3 – Volunteering Type 4 – Learning at Home Type 5 – Decision Making Type 6 – Collaborating With The Community Parent Coordinator workshops provide families with support in Common Core expectations, safety protocols, arts and crafts projects, cultural activities, and continue our Parent Book Club. A dedicated parent classroom is used for activities that take place during and after the school day. Parents Monthly Parent coordinator, Principal, SLT, PTA Sept. 2018 – June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. In collaboration with Alley Pond, our 5th grade students engage in water quality testing and our 4th grade students engage in soil testing activities. These two science inquiry based activities provide students with hands-on experiences that promote an appreciation for our environment and how best to conserve and protect all ecosystems. The UFT Dial-A-Teacher Program provides workshops for parents that support their children with homework help and offers supports to parents from middle school applications to the college application process. The Dial-A-Teacher workshop is scheduled during evening PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional resources and supplies will be purchased as needed throughout the year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A 2% increase in Fall and Winter 2018 parent attendance at PTA meetings, school events, and parent engagement opportunities as compared to Fall and Winter 2017. 5  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent event attendance sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYS ELA Test results for students in grades 3-5 AND F&P results for students in K-2. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) At-Risk SETSS as needed. Mathematics At-Risk SETSS as needed. NYS Math Test results for students in grades 3-5 AND diagnostic assessments in grades K-2. Science Teacher assessments. Social Studies Teacher assessments. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Parent request and teacher recommendation. Learning scaffolds used to support nonfiction text features. Learning scaffolds used to support nonfiction text features. Banana Splits Program Program addresses issues of students of divorced parents. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ESL and SETTS teacher provides academic support to at-risk students who demonstrate below grade level performance in reading . ESL and SETTS teacher provides academic support to at-risk students who demonstrate below grade level performance in mathematics. Small Group Small Group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day and after school AIS program. During the school day and after school AIS program. During the school day and after school AIS program. During the school day and after school AIS program. Small Group 1x/week 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 0 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 0  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 1  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Template Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 205Q in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 205Q will support parents and families of students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 3  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s educational program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Parent Involvement Policy,parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Parent Involvement Policy. ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy. ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association). This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; 4  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 205Q, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs. This Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 5  ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Student Led Parent Conferences. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 6  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name Alexander Graham Bell Borough Queens School Number 205 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Karen Scott-Piazza Coach Mary Butler ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Miriam Fishman Teacher/Subject Area Miriam Previti/Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Sadie Kim/Teacher Related-Service Provider Cassandra Laugen Superintendent Danielle Giunta Assistant Principal N/A Coach Literacy School Counselor Michelle Schneider Parent Parent Coordinator Lilly Chu Field Support Center Staff Member Rosalind Valencia Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 332 8 Total number of ELLs 28 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.43%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Lang. N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? ELL students are assessed with the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System to determine their independent and instructional reading levels. Additional assessments include NYSESLAT and NYS ELA Exams. Results indicate student's reading, writing, and math abilities that provides teachers with data to inform how curriculum resources, instruction and scaffolds are adjusted to meet students individual needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teacher teams, including ENL teacher, classroom teachers and data specialist analyze results of formative assessments and regularly articulate to adjust instructional planning for ELL students. The ENL teachers provides a push-in and pull-out program model to support groups of students. 9  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Periodic assessments and benchmark assessments in reading, writing, and mathematics including F&P , NYC benchmark assessments, Performance Series, NYSESLAT and ELA/Math Exams are used to monitor progress of our ELL students, beginning of year, middle of year and end of year. In addition, the ENL teacher administers Informal assessments throughout the year to assess student learning. Areas of need include: foundational reading skills, comprehension skills, and vocabulary development. This is done across different content area and instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL teacher runs the EDAT to determine which ELL students are at risk. Additional data, such as IEP status and attendance is utilized to address any necessary interventions. Teachers meet in grade level and vertical teams to make curricular adjustments in an effort to close the achievement gap. ELLs are included in Tier 2 intervention in a group setting when appropriate- to help students strengthen their comprehension and reading fluency. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The ELL teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher to design curriculum for individual students who receive at-risk instruction during the school day. Within the framework of the CCLS, the ELL/RTI students are given high quality Tier 1 instruction focused on promoting language and literacy development and developing different key domains of literacy to support competencies in reading, writing, listening, and speaking. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSITELL results show that we have 5 new kindergarten students who are eligible for ENL. One student was at the Expanding Level, the other was at the Transitional Level and the remaining students were at the Entering Level.. The NYSESLAT results indicate that in the current 1st grade, one students is in the Emerging Level, one student in the transitional level, and one students in Expanding Level. In 2nd grade, five students reached the Commanding Level at two students on the Expanding Level. In 3rd grade there are two students in the Commanding Level, two students on the Transitional Level, and one In the Expanding Level. In 4 th grade, there is one student at the Commanding Level. In 5 th grade, there are 4 students in the Commanding Level and 3 students in the Entering Level. .Each year students generally progress by at least one performance level on the NYSESLAT. Therefore the trend shows that our students typically meet proficiency levels after three or four years of ENL instruction. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? After analyzing all the ELL data, the ENL teacher meets with individual teacher team to share findings and propose instructional methodologies to ensure that students are receiving the appropriate support throughout the school day. Grade level teacher teams meet during Professional Development to analyze results of formative and summative assessments, discuss student progress and adapt curriculum as needed to help ensure continued progress of our ENL students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 0  In our free-standing ENL program, the ENL teacher uses a pull-out model for the stand-alone ENL minutes of instruction and a push-in model for the integrated ENL/ELA or any other content area instruction. The kindergarten children are grouped together; the first grade is grouped with the 2 nd grade ; 4th grade, Expanding and Commanding students are grouped together;and the "Entering" 4 th and 5 th grade students are grouped together. The beginner and entering students receive 180 minutes of stand alone instruction; the emerging students receive 90 minutes of stand alone instruction. In our integrated model, both the entering and emerging students receive 180 minutes of instruction. The transitioning students receive 90 minutes of instruction and another 90 minutes of stand alone. The expanding students receive only integrated instruction for 180 minutes and our commanding students receive only 90 minutes of integrated instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In a free-standing ENL program, students receive instruction within a push-in or pull-out model where students will receive mandated instruction according to their proficiency levels. For the Entering and Emerging students, 180 minutes of their instruction will be in stand-alone ENL and 180 minutes will be in integrated ENL. For Transitioning students, they will receive 90 minutes of stand alone ENL and 90 minutes in integrated ENL/content area. For students in the Expanding level, they will receive 180 minutes in ENL/ELA or content area. Students who are in the Commanding level will receive 90 minutes in the integrated ENL or content area. We only have four students who require 360 minutes. These four students are grouped together for the 180 minutes of stand alone ENL. These students are integrated into their correct grades for the 180 minutes of integrated ENL. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher pushes in to the classrooms to support CCLS lessons during the integrated ELA block. During the pull-out periods the ENL teacher provides students with explicit instruction aligned to CCLS to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. Integrated ENL instruction is provided via a push-in model. The ENL teacher coordinates with the classroom teacher to provide content area instruction using ENL methodologies. The ENL teacher provides language acquisition and vocabulary support. Students receive support in their home language through the use of the Oxford picture dictionary in Chinese, Korean, and Spanish, Google Translate and Bilingual Glossaries. ENL instruction is anchored to all NYS Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs take NYS exams in Math and Science in translated versions of their home language. They are given the opportunity to use bilingual glossaries for state exams. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are available for classroom use as well as classroom exams. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. We do not have SIFE children at this time. 1  b. ELL students who are in the US less than 3 years are immersed in our school's Balanced Literacy Program. Students use an online reading comprehension tool geared for ELL students in school and at home. They receive the appropriate number of minutes of ENL instruction per week. The classroom teacher is trained by the ENL teacher to make content area information comprehensible by using ENL methodologies such as TPR, visual aides, and peer tutoring as needed In the classroom. Newly arrived students have "buddies". These buddies help the children acclimate to the school and provide native language support. c. Our Developing ELLs are at the proficiency level of the NYSESLAT and receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction in a push-in model. d. At this time, we do not have any Long-Term ELL students. e. Former ELLS receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction per week for two years following meeting proficiency level on the NYSELAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers use instruction that promotes oral language development by using rich, complex texts that serve as platforms for learning and discussion. They utilize close, interactive read alouds, collaborative discussion, and open ended questions. Thinking Maps are used as an instructional tool that scaffolds learning for ELL/SWD's helping to support reading and writing and attainment of students' IEP goals. The Speaking and Listening, Reading and Writing strands of the Common Core support the four modalities of the ELL strands (speaking, listening, reading, writing). Teachers utilize the Leveled Literacy Intervention Program (LLI) which includes an ELL component to help support ELL -SWDs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL teacher supports learning in the classroom (as a push-in) to ensure adequate attainment of student understanding and comprehension in English. The classroom teacher and ENL teacher provide UDL activities to meet the needs of our ELLS and SWD population. Students are provided with additional time on class and city exams as well as AIS provided by classroom teacher, SETTS provider, and related services. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Students receive differentiated instruction in all content areas. AIS support periods (taught in English) have been scheduled 2 to 4 periods per week during the school day, geared specifically for our entering and emerging level students at 6 week cycles in all content areas. The AIS teacher, ENL teacher and classroom teacher will collaborate to determine the academic needs of each ELL student. ELL students use "Learning A-Z Raz-Kids" ELL component to provide ELA support. ELL students use an online program, IXL, to support and enrich the learning of CCLS in math content and concepts. These two individualized programs allow students to maximize their individual potential. Our ELLs receive additional academic support in all other content areas via RTI and/or SETTS as needed. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our data shows tha our ENL students improve by at least one level within each modality from NYSELAT and NYS ELA results. There are no ENL students who are currently at risk. We will continue to use the Common Core/ENL components on EnageNY and the TC Writing and Reading programs. Fundations Phonics Program will be implemented in Grades K-2 to enhance literacy skills in all modalities. Passport to Social Studies will help foster student acquisition of academic vocabulary and world knowledge. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 2  : ALL students are included in ALL activities ALL year round. Some of the programs/activities include our Self-Sustaining after school program, assembly programs, school trips and service learning projects. All students are made to feel welcomed and valued in all school functions. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Currently we are using the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Programs. Instructional materials include: Scholastic nonfiction guided reading program, big books on tape, individual word walls, poems, songs, and visual aids through the SMART Board. An online reading program, RAZ-Kids and the online math program, IXL are used by all students at school and at home. These programs adjust to each student's level of ability and support the student's learning at their own pace. Monolingual and bilingual dictionaries are used in the upper grades as well as rhyming dictionaries in the lower grades. For newcomers we use Google Translate when appropriate; the Oxford Picture Dictionary-Content Area for Kids and the I-Pad translate App. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL program, home-language support is given by pairing children of the same language as buddies and using language paras when necessary. Google translate and bilingual dictionaries provide additional support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All instruction and support services are differentiated to meet the needs of all ages and grade levels. The resources are always aligned with the CCLS grade level standards. Students are provided with glossaries in their home language and translation services when necessary to build English proficiency as well as to meet grade level standards. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Out Parent Coordinator provides outreach to any newly admitted student including all ELLs and ensures that parents are kept well informed of all school activities and functions. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 3  During the school year, the ENL teacher attends borough wide ENL workshops and turn-keys pertinent information to all staff members including members of the SBST, parapaprofessionals, guidance counselor, speech therapist, parent coordinator and office staff. The ENL teacher will hold workshops for teachers during the Monday Professional Learning time with a focus on text-complexity, scaffolding and academic language. Professional development is also data driven and needs based. The ENL teacher attends all other content area related professional development that is provided at the borough level and ensures our ELL students are meeting literacy and math standards per grade level with an emphasis on academic rigor and CCLS. The following topics will be presented during Professional Development throughout the school year: 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All teachers receive professional development dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. The ENL teacher attends all ELL-specific PD as provided by the district. All agendas and or attendance is maintained in the ENL teacher's file. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher schedules appointments with the parents during Tuesday-Parent Engagement time to discuss the goals of the program and student's areas of progress and next steps. Interpretation and translation services are available if parents request it. An annual parent meeting is also scheduled to report student progress. Students portfolios and performance series assessments are used to inform parents of ELLs. The new ELL Baseline Assessment results will also provide additional information on the ELLs progress. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs are included in all school-related activities. Our parent coordinator ensures that all ELL parents are informed in their own language of workshops and meetings. Parents of ELL students are on the PTA and are active in the classes of their children. Parents volunteer to assist on trips and other school events. The parent coordinator holds art and design workshops for parents. Teaching and Learning Community Days are held monthly. All parents are invited to participate. The following parent workshops are scheduled throughout the year: Monthly Book Clubs, Crochet Club, Middle School Information sessions, and Cultural Activities that include the yearly Cultural Fair. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. None 4  5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, KAREN PIAZZA, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Alexander Graham Bell School DBN: 26Q205 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Karen Scott-Piazza Title Principal Lilly Chu Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Miriam Fishman ENL/Bilingual Teacher Kara Keppel Parent Miriam Previti Teacher/Subject Area Sadie Kim Mary Butler Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Michelle Schneider School Counselor Danielle Giunta Rosalind Valenza Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Queens Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/10/15 9/10/01 9/10/15 9/10/15 9/10/15 9/10/15 9/10/15 9/10/15 9/10/15 9/10/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 26Q205 School Name: Alexander Graham Bell Superintendent: Danielle Giunta The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lilly Chu Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Using the ATS-Home Language Report and parent coordinator survey we have identified families who require translation assistance in either written or oral format. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Tibetan 2 .41 2 .41 8 2 2 82 0 0 345 14 0 16 3 0 Hindi Cham Chinese Japanese Mandarin English Polish Sinhalese Spanish Urdu Ukrainian .41 0.41 16.87 0 0 70.99 2.88 0 3.29 0.62 0 2 2 54 0 23 347 14 0 15 3 0 .41 .41 11.11 0 4.73 71.04 2.88 0 3.09 0.62 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 9  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Families will receive the following translated documents: September through June Parents Bill of Rights and Responsibilities September Registration Form September-June School Meals Form PTA Newsletters September-June Self-Sustaining After School Program School Curriculum Announcements and updates September - June Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The parent coordinator sends all documents to the NYC DOE Translation Unit. The parent coordinator sends all documents to the NYC DOE Translation Unit. The parent coordinator sends all documents to the NYC DOE Translation Unit. The parent coordinator sends all documents to the NYC DOE Translation Unit. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Our face-to-face meetings include: Back to School Night in September 2017 September Tuesday - Parent Engagement time throughout the school year. September-June Student Led Conferences November 2017, March 2018, and May 2018. PTA Meetings September - June interpretation service(s)? We have staff members who are available for translation services in the following languages: Chinese, Korean, Spanish, Italian, Greek, and Urdu We have staff members who are available for translation services in the following languages: Chinese, Korean, Spanish, Italian, Greek, and Urdu We have staff members who are available for translation services in the following languages: Chinese, Korean, Spanish, Italian, Greek, and Urdu We have staff members who are available for translation services in the 0  following languages: Chinese, Korean, Spanish, Italian, Greek, and Urdu 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. All emergency documents have been sent out in translated versions. A Parent-Buddy is set up at the beginning of the year, to ensure that all parents are apprised of emergency situations. we use a School-Messenger System to reach all families in the event of an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The parent coordinator ensures that all staff members are aware that the Translation and Interpretation Services are available as needed. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents are to be given a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation service. A sign is posted at the school’s main entrance of the most prominent covered languages – Chinese and Mandarin, indicating the availability of interpretation services. The school’s safety agent will be given assistance by the Parent Coordinator or staff member to provide interpretation services to parents entering the building. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The parent coordinator will conduct surveys throughout the year to ensure that parents needs are being met in a timely fashion. Parent feedback dictates changes made throughout the year for available translation services. We will consider scheduling a parent focus group to receive feedback that will strengthen communication of limited-English-proficient parents 1 
