 28Q206 School Name: P.S. 206 THE HORACE HARDING SCHOOL Principal: JOAN THOMAS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 206 The Horace Harding School 28Q206 342800010206 Pre-kindergarten-grade 5 School Number (DBN): 61-02 97th Place Rego Park, New York 11374 718-592-0300 Phone Number: 718-271-7011 Fax: Joan L. Thomas jthomas4@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Joan L. Thomas Paula Friedlander Sonya Sakhrani Marie Torres Robert Llopis NA NA District Information Geographical District: 28 Superintendent: MabelSarduy Superintendent’s Office Address: 90-27SutphinBlvd Queens, New York 11435 Superintendent’s Email Address: msarduy@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-5572618 Fax: 718-557-2623 Field Support Center (FSC) Marlene Wilks FSC: QueensSouth Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: mwilks@schools.nyc.gov 82-01RockawayBlvd Ozone Park, NY 11416 Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-642-5855 Phone Number: Fax: 718-642-5855   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Joan L. Thomas Paula Friedlander Sonya Sakhrani Marie Torres Robert Llopis Leslie Hartzog-Schwan Kimberly McManus Brenda Jackson *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nadine Hanna Ana Montalvan Rod Jung Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our mission statement: "Our mission is to provide an educational environment that is academically challenging, caring and safe for all students. At PS 206, learning is enhanced by: a research based successful literacy program; the development of critical thinkers and lifelong learners; the implementation of a common core curriculum which is interdisciplinary in nature; the integration of applied learning strategies and technology into the curriculum with the   immersion of the arts into the everyday lives of all students. Through high expectations, committed parents, dedicated staff and administration, our students will lead us to a bright future." 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 206 The Horace Harding School is an elementary school that is located in Rego Park, New York. We have adopted the nickname ”The Little Red Schoolhouse." We are truly the little red school house located directly on the service road off the eastbound Long Island Expressway. PS 206 The Horace Harding School has been in existence for sixty five years.. We are truly a community school. We are proud of the fact that generations of families have attended elementary school at PS 206 The Horace Harding School. Our school has a rich tradition of academic excellence and community in the heart of Rego Park, New York. Our school has a student population of 620 and growing. We are a pre-kindergarten-grade 5 school. Our school has an integrated co-teaching model for students with disabilities in grades Kindergarten - grade 5. We have three small special education classes that are designed to meet the needs of our special education students as per their Individualized Education Plan. We provide related services in the areas of speech and language therapy, occupational therapy, physical therapy and mandated guidance counseling services. The Rego Park area of New York is a melting pot of New York City. We are very proud of the diversity in our school building. We have approximately 180 students in our school who are English Language Learners. We implement the stand-alone English as a New Language (ENL) instructional model and the integrated co-teaching model based on the regulations of CR Part 154. The integrated co-teaching model emphasizes content with language function. Our school uses zero period from 8:05 pm to 8:35 pm for targeted support services for ELL (English Language Learners) in the area of guided reading and strategy reading groups. Our school also offers a Title III program for our ELL (English Language Learner) students after school from 2:20-5:00 Wednesday and Thursday. The focus of our Title III program is on our entering, emerging and transitioning ELLS (English Language Learners) in grades 2-5. Our diversity is what defines us as a school community. Within our walls, over a dozen different languages are spoken and children attend PS 206 from over 30 different countries. Our school is programmed to have reading, writing and mathematics blocks in kindergarten through grade 4. Our grade 5 is departmentalized in the area of mathematics, English Language Arts, writing, social studies. In addition, all students are engaged in weekly lessons in science, technology, theatre and visual arts. We have embraced a balanced literacy philosophy for students in K-5. Balanced Literacy encompasses all of the important aspects for the development of reading skills for all students. Our students participate in shared reading, read aloud, guided reading and independent reading during the Reading Workshop. Our units of study in literacy are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. This methodology of teaching children to learn to read and write is evidence-based for literacy instruction in grades K-5. Our students in K-2 are provided an opportunity to naturally develop as readers through teacher created units from rich literature and research based methodology. Our K-2 students are engaged in phonics through Fundations and Sadlier and drastic sight word instruction. They are all matched to "Just Right Books" to improve their reading proficiency through guided reading complimented with text complexity. Our students in grades 3-5 are immersed in a Balanced Literacy philosophy that uses the resource of Ready Gen to support their learning. In addition, teachers have created new units with rich literature as a response to our student data. Our students in grades 3-5 also work with their teacher in guided reading and strategy groups. They are matched to "Just Right Books" to ensure that they improve their proficiency. Word work and vocabulary 0  development are an important part of of grade 3-5 literacy program. Expanding background knowledge and enhancing vocabulary in K-5 students is very important for reading development. We have embraced the Teacher's College Writing Project Units of Study aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers work collaboratively in grade level teams and vertical teams to create units of study that follow the model of the Teacher's College Writing Project. Our students in K-5 are writing about wonderful, amazing things in a focused genre writing study. PS 206 students love writing and sharing their writing with our school community. Mathematics is focused on using standards based and mathematical practice approach utilizing the Go Math resource and Engage New York that is planned through the work on teacher teams.. Our math focus is to increase rigor in our math workshops. This translates in math instruction that allows students to gain the following: conceptual understanding, application and fluency. The school emphasizes open-ended problem solving investigations on a daily basis. In addition, our school works with student on "Three Act" math problems which is a way for students to work through and solve problems connected to the real world. We emphasize the Mathematical Practices aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Our students in grades 4 and 5 participate in Math Olympiad which is a worldwide competition in solving real word problems. Our grade 5 students receive mathematics instruction for a 90 minute block each day. They are also highly engaged in "Three Act" math workshops twice a week. PS 206 The Horace Harding School boasts a wonderful arts program. All students at PS 206 receive visual art instruction with a certified art teacher. who addresses the Blueprint in Art. Students also learn about different artists and the amazing work that they do. Our student artists participate in a culminating Art Fair Celebration at the end of the school year in which the art of our students is showcased for parents. In addition, we have an Art Club for our young ladies and young men during the lunch period. Ps 206 also has a brand new state of the art auditorium which houses our theatre program with a certified theatre teacher from New York University, All students are programmed for theatre during the school year. They are engaged in fun and engaging activities that help them with their speaking skills, listening skills, creativity and confidence. We have a winter performance of a Shakespeare Junior play and a Spring performance. Throughout the year students put on classroom and grade level performances. Our school's physical education program has two teachers. One teacher is a certified physical education teacher and the other teacher is a certified common branch teacher with physical education experience. Each class at PS 206 receives a minimum of two periods of physical education a week. In addition, all of our classroom teachers are certified to implement Move to Improve in their classrooms. We have a Health and Nutrition Club and a Yoga Club. Our school also participates in the District 28 Basketball Program with other schools throughout the district. Our students in grades 3-5 come to school at 7:15am on Wednesday and Thursday for our intramural sports program.. Communication to our parents about our physical education program is shared in a monthly Physical Education Newsletter. Our school became a CookShop school during the 2017-2018 school year. We will continue partnering with the New York Food Bank to bring CookShop to grades Pre-kindergarten-grade 2 for the 2018-2019 school year. At PS 206, we are very proud of the positive learning environment that is evident the moment you enter our school. We use a Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports (PBIS) program as a behavior management system that rewards students and improves student culture and climate. Our PBIS program is enhanced by the implementation of the PowerBrain and Sanford Harmony programs. In addition, our partnership with the New York City Department of Education's program Thrive which supports teachers, students and families in the area of mental wellness. Community service and giving back to the community is part of the culture of our school. Our student government is an active voice in our school community. They participate in different community projects such as City Harvest, Toys for Tots, Books and Pajamas by Scholastic. Our school also participates in the WE program which is a global partnership to grow leaders in our schools who will help to make our world a better place. During the Fall, our school participates in the Heavenly Hats Parade which is dedicated to raising funds to purchase hats for children and adults who are being treated for cancer. Our school Gardening Club has made the landscape of our school which rests in a very urban setting truly magical. 1  Our school hosts two after school programs. The first program is the Queens Central Y M & YWHA program which is state funded through 21st Century. This is program for 150 students in grades K-5 from October 2018-May 2019. Our second program is through Thinking Caps. This is a program for a fee for students in pre-kindergarten-grade 5. Both programs highlight academic support and homework help as well as enrichment activities through the arts. The Parent Coordinator works closely with the Administration and the officers of the Parent's Association Executive Board to increase parent engagement. Parents participate in Meet the Teacher Night, Bagels with the Principal events, Middle School Information Sessions, Nutrition Workshops, Cookshop Workshops, Safety Workshops,. Working Lab Sessions on completing Lunch Forms and opening their student school account, Daddy Doughnut Day, Family Bingo Night, Family Movie Night, Science Fair Week, Art Fair Week, Family Game Night, content area parent workshops, Internet Safety sessions, Preparing your Child for the NYS ELA and Math exams, English as a Second Language Family Support and more. Our school has a website ps206q.org which is up dated regularly with messages from the administration, advertising for upcoming events, helpful links and monthly up dates from each grade. Our families also use Remind as a way to stay connected to our school and what is taking place. Student teachers are the future of the education system. Providing a lab site for future teachers to work with experienced teachers to learn curriculum and grow in practice is a commitment that our school has made. We enjoy and welcome our partnerships with Queens College, St. John's University and Touro College. Based on the 2017-2018 Principal Practice Observation, an area of celebration for PS 206 is indicator (1.1) Curriculum, (1.3) Resources Allocation, and (1.4) Learning Environment. Our teacher teams meet weekly to work collaboratively during the school year. On Mondays they create curriculum maps in all subject areas to meet the needs of all learners. Teacher teams make adjustments to these maps throughout the school year based on student data, class data, grade data and school data. We are a Title I school but our resources and ability to do different things are challenging. We were able to secure grants to increase technology in our building and allow all students to have access to the internet and its resources. We also create a schedule that allows teachers to provide different interventions and enrichment for targeted students in the school. Our school community has been recognized for creating an environment of mutual trust and respect. This is evident in the many ongoing collaborations among our staff, parents and students alike. We have a safe and welcoming environment that provides the setting for student achievement, meeting students' social emotional needs and making the students sufficiently comfortable to take the academic risks required of them. Based on the 2017-2018 Principal Practice Observation, the areas for improvement are indicators (1.2) Pedagogy. Teachers will be trained in the use of different tools to bring critical thinking and an increase of the level of rigor to a level of maintenance and consistency in the school. Teachers will receive professional development in different thinking maps/organizers and other strategies to assist students in formulating and organizing ideas and making their thinking visible. Teachers will work toward looking for ways to accurately assess progress to ensure that they are properly addressing the necessary skills and level of rigor in units of study planning to ensure that the lesson objectives are geared in the right direction. The school learning community will look for ways to consistently use data to make curriculum and instructional decisions. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The special student population that the school has identified is our English Language Learner population. This group has been identified due to the size of this population and how it is rapidly growing with the school community. The specific needs for this group encompass a wide range of areas. Students must be provided with appropriate rigorous tasks that have multiple entry levels to ensure success. In addition, they need to be immersed in a highly effective English as a New Language Program to support them in language acquisition. The general education teachers requires 2  high level professional learning opportunities so that they are able to provide the supports and scaffolds for these students when they are 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. When reflecting on the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, PS 206 The Horace Harding School made good progress in the areas of Supportive Environment, Effective School Leadership, Collaborative Teachers and Trust. We will continue to grow in these elements as they are essential for looking at the big picture of a great school. The two areas that we will focus on for the 2018-2019 school year are: Rigorous Instruction and Strong Family and Community Ties. As a school community, we will continue to monitor, refine and reflect on all of these elements so that PS 206 The Horace Harding School will continue to be a great school. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q206 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 610 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 6 6 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 5 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 79.0% % Attendance Rate 72.1% % Reduced Lunch 29.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 29.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 30.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.26 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 41.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 78% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES NO N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 47 47 21 93.9% 6.2% 11.6% 16.2% 21.1% 3.1% 2 0% 10.3 40.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YSH N/A NO YES YES YES N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Rigorous Instruction on the Framework for Great Schools continues to be a high need area for the school community. Currently, 35% of the students in grades 3-5 are proficient in ELA based on New York State test results. This is below the city level and the cohort level. Currently 36.1% of our students are proficient in math based on New York State test results.. In addition, Rigorous Instruction scored a 3.18 which was below the city average on the Learning Environment Survey. However, 3.18 is a 0.5 improvement from 2017-2018 results. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will engage students in rigorous math tasks which measure: conceptual understanding, application and fluency. These tasks will be supported through scaffolds, thinking maps, problem solver organizers, the use of the tool SOLVE, use of manipulatives, and technology resulting in a proficiency increase in math of 10%. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Ongoing professional development will be provided to all teachers at PS 206 with a focus on the what is rigor in the math classroom, use of thinking maps/organizers, scaffolding, critical thinking tools, flexible grouping for clear expectations. Teachers and paraprofessionals Start September 2018 and end June 2019 Lead teachers from instructional cabinet Principal Assistant Principal In addition, instructional learning walks will take place monthly with administration and designated staff. Inter-visitations will take place in the school where teachers watch best practices in classrooms. The focus will encompass rigor in the math classroom with a protocol created by the instructional cabinet. Observation cycles by the administration with a focus on domain 1 and domain 3 of the Danielson Framework. Observation cycles will be conducted in a timely manner with immediate feedback and recommendations made for next steps. Principal and Assistant Principal will discuss observation results at cabinet meetings and create a plan for differentiating the support needed for teachers. ENL teachers and special education teachers will collaborate and work with teacher teams to scaffold instruction and support student learning with multiple entry points for the different subgroups. Strategies from the Mult-Lingual Institute will be planned for students. Teachers Start September 2018 and end May 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Paraprofessionals Start September 2018 and end June 2019 English Language Learner Teachers Special Education Teachers Principal Assistant Principal Our parent coordinator will work with our families on providing workshop opportunities in the different elements of rigorous instruction in the math classroom. Families will participate in different activities during the extended day on PS 206 Families Sept. 2018 Teachers -June 2019 Parent Coordinator 6  Tuesday. Twice a year, families will be invited to Student Led Conferences. Teacher teams will use inquiry time to look at student work outcomes and adjust or modify curriculum maps to ensure that rigor is evident in the final results. Teacher teams will also identify standard deficiencies and create scaffolds and supports to address these deficiencies in the standards in Mathematics Vertical teacher teams will engage in lesson plan and curriculum map studies to ensure the consistency of instruction throughout the grades that results in rigor. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal Assistant Principal Teacher teams Oct. 2018 Teacher teams June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Teacher teams Aug. 2018 - June 2019 Teacher teams Principal Assistant Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent coordinator, administration and teachers will continue to communicate clearly and often with parents using Engrade Pro, the school website and Parent Engagement Tuesdays. In addition, our school will continue to have Student Led Conferences during the months of November and March. Our school will welcome parents into the classrooms to see the activities that students are engaged in during Open School Week in November. Parents will be invited to classrooms to take part in celebrations in the classroom.. Our parent coordinator will continue to host parent workshops that will support their understanding of rigorous instruction and the common core. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Administration, teachers (classroom, ENL,), Guidance Counselor, Related Service Providers  Monday Professional Learning Days and Tuesday Parent Engagement Time  Common preps and teacher team meetings  Per Session opportunities  Per Diem for professional development and teacher team planning  Off site professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7  By November 2018, 1% of the students will show a proficiency increase of 2% based on Math Module assessment. By January 2019 3% of the students will show a proficiency increase of 4% based on Math Module assessments. By May 2019 , 2% of the students in grades 3-5 will show a proficiency increase of at least one level using the Rally Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Math Module Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We used Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports (PBIS) to address the social and emotional needs of our student. PBIS assisted us with behavior management however the needs of many children were not fully met. The success of PBIS may also have been hindered as it was not practiced with fidelity by all staff members. To address the social and emotional needs of all of our students we will mandate a morning meeting time in which teachers will utilize practices from Sanford Harmony and Power Brain. Sanford Harmony aims to create a classroom where students are empowered to: communicate, cooperate, connect, embrace diversity, and resolve conflict. It is a social-emotional teaching program that cultivates strong classroom relationships between all students. Power Brain utilizes an exciting combination of physical, emotional and cognitive exercises to tap into our infinite brain potential. This program aims to empower children and adults to improve focus, confidence, memory, creativity and emotional wellness while reducing stress and anxiety. Students will arrive at school each day and be able to check in with someone that they know cares about their well being. Having this emotional needs met will ensure that students are ready and present for learning. Teachers will also be encouraged to use practices from both Power Brain and Sanford Harmony throughout the school day to address students' needs as they may arise. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will have a school wide focus on social emotional learning with classroom systems, utilizing practices from Sanford Harmony and Power Brain, will be embedded to address the social and emotional needs of all students and result in a 10% decrease in level 2 and level 3 OORS reports. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers previously trained using Power Brain will meet with their colleagues to share the materials received during training and turnkey the information they received during training. Teachers Sept 2018 to June 2019 Parents will be invited to attend workshops throughout the school year that address the social and emotional needs of adults and children. These workshops may be presented through a partnership with ThriveNYC. ThriveNYC is a City of New York initiative to create a mental health system that works for everyone; and/or staff members that have been trained to address mental health issues. Teachers will attend workshops throughout the school year that address mental health and bullying. These workshops may be presented through a partnership with ThriveNYC. ThriveNYC is a City of New York initiative to create a mental health system that works for everyone; and/or staff members that have been trained to address mental health issues. Students Parents Sept 2018 to June 2019 Teachers Sept 2018 to June 2019 Teachers will lead morning meetings each school day implementing practices from Sanford Harmony and Power Brain. Students Teachers will be engaged in professional learning activities at least once a month centered on social emotional learning. Teachers Teachers Sept 2018 to June 2019 Sept 2018 to June 2019 Teachers Guidance Counselor Administration Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator Administration Teachers Guidance Counselor Administration Guidance Counselor Administration Administration Guidance Counselor 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to attend workshops throughout the school year that address the social and emotional needs of adults and children. These workshops may be presented through a partnership with ThriveNYC. ThriveNYC is a City of New York initiative to create a mental health system that works for everyone; and/or staff members that have been trained to address mental health issues. Our parent coordinator will work with families who are struggling with these issues and provide them with resources. Our guidance counselor and social worker will work with families through workshops, conferences, and sharing community resources. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to achieve this annual goal, the following budget and resource alignments will be put n place: Monday professional learning time will be used for teachers trained in the use of Sanford Harmony and Power Brain practices to turnkey this information with their colleagues; teachers will utilize regularly scheduled teacher team meetings to share best practices and formulate plans of action to improve their implementation of these practices; fliers will be backpacked to families and posted on our school website inviting families to attend workshops that address mental health issues; autism, and bullying. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 50% decrease of students seeing the guidance counselor for emotional and social issues. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  OORS reports  Guidance counselor intake forms  Parent Intake forms  Domain 2 of the Danielson Framework for Teaching Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school has systems in place for teachers to communicate effectively, plan together, and look at student work. It is evident through our conversations with teachers, their ability to modify units, make adjustments in instruction and understand their student data is at a developing phase. In order to strengthen the teachers ability to modify units, make adjustments in instruction and understand their student data, they will be engaged in collaborative data conversations with administration. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will work collaboratively during scheduled weekly Teacher Team meetings and engage in data conversations with administration to modify units in the area of ELA, make adjustments in ELA instruction, reflect on teacher practice and connect their practice to the impact on student learning as evidenced by an increase of 3 levels on the F & P assessment. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will work collaboratively during scheduled Teacher Team meetings and engage in data conversations with administration to modify units, make adjustments in instruction and understand their student data. Teacher Teams Paraprofessionals Teacher Teams Teacher Teams will meet with administration after assessments have been administered and graded in reading , writing, social studies and math. Administrators will introduce teachers to a protocol for analyzing student data. Teachers will adhere to the assessment calendar to ensure all classes on a grade administer and score assessments in preparation for collaborative data conversations with administration. Start September 2018 and end June 2019 Start September 2018 and end June 2019 Instructional Lead teachers per grade Principal Assistant Principal Instructional Lead teachers per grade Principal Assistant Principal Teachers will work collaboratively to make adjustments to curriculum maps and units of study to address gaps in student mastery of content in reading, writing, social studies, and math through the inclusion of scaffolds, modifications, and other relevant supports. Teacher Teams Start in September 2018 and end in June 2019 Instructional Lead teachers per grade Principal Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will have access to student data using Engrade Pro, an online grade book. Teachers will post students grades on Engrade Pro and parents will have access to this data in real time. Parents will check Engrade Pro for messages from their child's teacher and to monitor the progress that their child is making in the area of reading, writing, social studies, and math. Teachers are also available to meet with families during parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons. 3  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Cabinet  Administration   Monday Professional Development and Tuesday Parent Engagement Time  Common preps and teacher team meetings  Per Session  Per Diem for professional development and planning  Off site professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all classroom teachers will use a data protocol to analyze student data and make adjustments to curriculum maps and units of study that address students gaps in mastery of understanding of the content through the inclusion of scaffolds, modifications, and other relevant supports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Curriculum maps in reading, writing, social studies, and math with adjustments.  Teacher team meeting weekly template  Domain 1,3,4 of the Danielson Framework for Teaching  Progress Monitoring in ELA, Math, Writing and Social Studies Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per feedback from PPO, structures are in place that monitor instructional and operational systems. More regular, purposeful and consistent evaluations of the quality of these systems and school level decisions related to curricula, instruction, assessments and the of teacher teams is needed. The above needs to be in place in order to make necessary adjustments that will increase coherence of school-wide-practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will create and reinforce structures and systems for K-5 teacher teams to track student progress on math standard deficiencies as measured by pre and post tests and math modules.. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Weekly cabinet meeting (attendance, agenda, minutes) Instructional cabinet meeting monthly or as needed (attendance, agenda, minutes) where the systems in place will be measured for consistency. School Leadership Team meets at least once a month (attendance, agenda, and minutes) Sept 2018 to June 2019 Principal Sept 2018 to June 2019 Principal Sept 2018 to June 2019 Principal School Leadership Team chair Assistant Principal Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator Grade leader Lead ENL teacher Lead Cluster teacher Assistant Principal Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator Grade leader Lead ENL teacher Lead Cluster teacher Parents DC 37 Teachers Paraprofessionals 6 Parents Association Executive Board monthly meeting Parents Sept 2018 to June 2019 Principal Parent Coordinator Parent's Association President Feedback forms from professional development sessions. Teachers Sept 2018 to June 2019 Principal Paraprofessionals Assistant Principal Grade level parent newsletter that is backpacked home once a month Parents Sept 2018 to June 2019 Presenters Grade teams Assistant Principal Monthly newsletter to teachers sharing outcomes/results from all meetings Teachers Sept 2018 to June 2019 Principal Paraprofessionals Assistant Principal Teacher Formal and Informal Observation cycles through Advance using the Danielson Framework Teachers The creation of data tracking systems in the area of mathematics to measure standards deficiencies. Teachers October 2018-May 2019 Principal Assistant Principal September 2018-October 2019 School Leaders Teachers Instructional Cabinet 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator will work with families using the Engrade Pro system to monitor their child's progress in math. Teacher teams will provide monthly workshops for parents to address the needs of students with the deficient math standards. Families will have the opportunity to attend a Family Math Night. Parents will be given access to their child's Think Central account. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7  In order to achieve this annual goal, the following budget and resource alignments will be put in place: Monday afternoons will be used for professional learning around CEP goals and instructional focus. A system for observations that ensure timely and actionable feedback, scheduling that allows for planning time for grade level teams and planning times for vertical teams, the purchase of additional materials to support the current programs that are being used in the school, math coach for modeling and coaching purposes, articulation time between support providers and teachers. Schedules will be created and followed for all meeting dates, newsletter submission dates by staff and administration, as well as dates that all newsletter will be distributed to pertinent parties. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School administration will coordinate professional learning opportunities (plo) for teachers prior to the start of school opening in September 2018. Teachers will complete self-evaluation sheets after attending each professional learning opportunity and meet with school administration prior to turn keying this information with relevant staff. All initial planning conferences will take prior to the end of October 2018 and observation to begin after the conference is held for each teacher. Cabinet meetings will take place at a minimum once per week; instructional cabinet meetings will take place at a minimum once per month. Attendance, agendas and minutes will be collected and on file for all meetings. Parents Association Executive Board will meet at a minimum oncer per month. A grade level parent newsletter will be backpacked home once a month. Teachers will receive a monthly newsletter sharing outcomes/results from all meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  pre and post chapter tests to measure the growth of standard deficiencies in math.  modules in math  progress monitoring Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on feedback from parents shared at monthly School Leadership Team meetings and minimal attendance at workshops provided by our staff and outside organizations, we will provide at least one opportunity per month during the 2018-2019 school year for families to participate in celebratory events which have had consistently better attendance than workshops. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent attendance at monthly celebratory events will average a minimum of 25 families per event as recorded on sign-in sheets that are available at the start of each event. These celebratory events will inform family and community members of the many activities and practices that our students are engaged in on a daily basis with an emphasis on families continuing these practices in their homes. 9 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). At school curriculum night, parents will be informed of the monthly celebratory events for the school year including the theme/title, date, and time of each event. Translation will be available to support parents in Spanish and Russian. A minimum of one celebratory event will take place at the school each month in which all families are invited to attend. Families will be introduced to an activity that students engage in on a regular basis. Translation will be available to support parents in Spanish and Russian. Fliers will be distributed to parents in different languages at the start of each month and at curriculum night. These fliers will also be posted on our school website. Each celebratory event will be added to our school calendar which will backpacked home with students on a monthly basis and is also accessible through our school website. Translation will be available to support parents in Spanish and Russian. Parents Staff Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents Staff Sept 2018 to June 2019 Parents Staff Sept 2018 to June 2019 Sept 2018 to June 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administrators Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administrators Teachers Parent Coordinator Administrators If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NYPD Community Affairs Thinking Capps Queens Central Y Thrive Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to achieve this annual goal, the following budget and resource alignments will be put in place: A letter will be backpacked home with all students at the start of the school year outlining the goal to have a minimum of one family and community celebratory event each month of the school year. Fliers with a description, date, and time will be 0  backpacked home and posted on our school website inviting students, their families, and community members to join staff for a celebratory event. Each specific event will also be highlighted on our school calendar which is backpacked home at the start of each month and is also accessed on our school website. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 75% of the parents community will log in to their child's Engrade Pro account. By February 2019, sign-in sheets for school celebratory events will be reviewed to determine the number of families that have attended each event and an average will be generated. Based on this review of data we will determine if attendance has a minimum average attendance of 20 families. If 20 or more families average attending these celebratory events we will continue with the practice as described herein. If the average number of families attending these celebratory events is less than 20 families we will have to analyze the data, such as the theme/title, time and date, family feedback, and student participation to determine our next steps. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.     Sign-in sheets for each event feedback sessions School Leadership Team meeting feedback Learning Environment Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Services in ELA are provided during the school day. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Shared reading Read aloud Double Dose Fundations Guided Reading Strategy Reading Groups The delivery of service for the programs and strategies for ELA are delivered in many ways; small group instruction, whole group instruction, peer groups, one to one conferences, flexible groups and peer tutoring. Fluency Formula Wilson Reading Program Great Leaps RTI intervention that is developed through the Ready Gen program Readworks.org Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students in September 2018 are given a baseline assessment in reading and writing. The results of this baseline assessment determine ifRTI services are appropriate. In addition, teachers use their year to year data cards to analyze student information over a period of time to determine ifRTI services are appropriate. Students, who are held over in their current grade or were potential holdovers, are automatically flagged for services.Students, who perform far below grade level standards on any of the above assessments, receive Tier II or Tier III services. Students who are approaching grade level standards receive tier I services. 2  Mathematics Science All students in September 2018, are given a baseline assessment in mathematics. The results of this baseline assessment determine ifRTI services are appropriate. In addition, teachers use their year to year data cards to analyze student information over a period of time to determine ifRTI services are appropriate. Students, who are held over in their current grade or were potential holdovers, are automatically flagged for services. Students, who perform far below grade level standards on any of the above assessments, receive Tier II or Tier III services. Students who are approaching grade level standards receive tier I services. Fluency drills and competition are part of the math fabric in the school. Using an interdisciplinary approach, students read non-fiction science content during the literacy block. Students are also engaged in monthly writing activity tasks which focus on writing in the area of science. Vocabulary Services in Math are provided during the school day TenMarks.com Think Central Math Olympiad Great Leaps Math RTI games and activities provided through Go math The delivery of service for the programs and strategies for Math are delivered in many ways; small group instruction, whole group instruction, peer groups, one to one conferences, flexible groups and peer tutoring. Services in Science are provided during the school day ReadyGen Reading Program Starmatica website New York State Science based program Readworks.org Time for Kids The delivery of service for the programs and strategies for Science are delivered in many ways; small group instruction, whole group instruction, peer groups, one to one conferences, flexible groups and peer tutoring. In addition, 3  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, development is supported through this interdisciplinary approach to science. Hands on materials are also used to support learning as well as the use of technology. Within the science program, quizzes, tests and projects are administered and scored using a common core standard rubric. Using an interdisciplinary approach, students read non-fiction social studies content during the literacy block. Students are also engaged in monthly writing activity tasks which focus on writing in the area of social studies. Vocabulary development is supported through this interdisciplinary approach to social studies. Hands on materials are also used to support learning as well as the use of technology. Within the social studies classroom program, quizzes, tests and projects are administered and scored using a common core standard rubric. The school guidance counselor meets with her mandated students as well as Scholastic we have a co-teaching model in our science classrooms in which the science teacher co-teaches with the classroom teacher. Services in Social Studies are provided during the school day ReadyGen Reading Program Starmatica website New York City Framework for Social Studies Readworks.org Time For Kids The delivery of service for the programs and strategies for Social Studies are delivered in many ways; small group instruction, whole group instruction, peer groups, one to one conferences, flexible groups and peer tutoring Scholastic Guidance services are provided through Services are delivered in a small group or one-to-one. Services are provided during the school day. 4 School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) research based programs. her at risk students. The school psychologist works with students in the area of improving self-esteem when it comes to learning. The guidance counselor facilitates clubs for the children such as Chess Club, Girls Arts Club, and Student Leaders. The school social worker meets with her mandated and non-mandated students. 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) PS 206 has 10 students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students who are in temporary housing, are closely monitored by the guidance counselor in ensure that they are socially and emotionally having their needs met. Support from the parent coordinator will be provided to parents so that they can find the many different supports and resources that are in the community. Funding is used for these children to ensure that they have all school related materials that they need for the school year. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  Not applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not applicable 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. PS 206Q attracts highly qualified teachers by our rigorous interview protocols: ● PS 206Q hiring committee discusses interview questions and demo lessons prior to interviews. ● Open Market is used to search for candidates as well as resumes sent to principal through email and our HR liaison. ● Candidates meet with Hiring Committee and participate in the interview process. ● Candidate teachers teach a demonstration lesson with children from PS 206Q while being observed by administration and a designated member of the Hiring Committee. PS 206Q retains and nurtures teachers by: ● Providing numerous common planning periods with grade level colleagues ● First year mentoring program is in place at our school. In addition, PS 206Q provides second year mentoring when needed. Teachers who are new to a grade or teachers who receive an overall rating of developing or ineffective, are assigned a buddy teacher for the school year. ● Observations conducted by the administration based on the Danielson Framework with timely feedback. ● Professional Development opportunities that include two Chancellor’s Professional Development Days and Monday extended day as per UFT contract. In addition monthly and weekly teacher team meetings and professional learning opportunities through the district. ● PS 206Q differentiates professional development and our professional development team creates a plan to meet the needs of all pedagogy. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 8  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers, administrators and paraprofessionals receive professional development within the capacity of our school and our district. All parties also engage in professional reading and they stay up-dated with the latest news for common core standards and instructional best practices to meet the needs of all learners. Differentiated professional development is provided to teachers based on formal and informal observations, interest surveys, needs assessment and data gathered from learning walks and data dives. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). not applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Students from preschool are registered in the school based on their school pick for pre-kindergarten and kindergarten. Parents are supported through the registration process by our pupil accounting secretary, English Language Learner teacher who performs the intake and our parent coordinator. Parents are given an information packet to direct them to where they need to go for support. The school offers parent tours for parents and students who are transitioning into elementary school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The school has a MOSL committee which works with the administration to make decisions in reference to assessment decisions and professional development for school assessments. The School Leadership Team also works on assessment decisions for the school. Within teacher teams, performance based tasks and classroom tasks are adopted, adapted or created to ensure alignment with the CCLS and to promote higher order thinking skills. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 9  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) all sections all sections all sections all sections all sections Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 268,563 43,213.00 22,222.00 unknown 3,710,295.00 X X X x X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 0  semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 206, The Horace Harding School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 2  Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 206, The Horace Harding School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; 3  ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; 4  ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 206 The Horace Harding School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 5  ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 6  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  8  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The population of P.S. 206 reflects the diversity of the surrounding community. Within our targeted population of ENL students we will offer an after school program for 100 students in a range of grades 2-5. The language of instruction will be in English with all of the appropriate scaffolds in place. Many of our English as a New Language students arrive with no or little prior schooling. Others come from war-torn countries where their education may have been compromised. Still, others have their learning interrupted by mid-year or extended summer visits to their native lands. To address the unique needs of these children, our school mission encourages the designing of programs that meet the potential of all students. Therefore, one important goal is to provide and implement a curriculum for these English Language Learners.. There was a total of 190 English Language Learners who took the New York State English as a Second Language (NYSESLAT) given in the Spring of 2018. The results from Spring 2018 were very positive. Twenty-one students tested out of services and are now commanding. Four additional students scored level 3 on New York State ELA test and are now commanding. All students moved a minimum of 2 proficiency levels.. We, therefore, propose the following Title III program: For 2018-2019 TItle III ELL After school Program will be developed for students in Grades, 2, 3, 4, and 5. We will invite 50 English Language Learners - of all levels to attend the program on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday. Each class will commence at 2:30 pm. Students will be dismissed at 4:30. The program will begin on November 14, 2018 and end in April on a date to be determined later. There will be a supervisor on site supervising teachers and students.. The school has purchased the software program Imagine Learning for our technology lab. Students will work in the technology lab for one full hour to receive customized instruction through Imagine Learning to address their weaknesses and to support their strengths. Upon completion of the hour long lab session, students will work directly with a licensed ENL teacher in small groups targeting specific areas identified through Imagine Learning and the NYSELAT results from 2018. The three specialists will work together as a team with the knowledge of using necessary techniques and scaffolding for ELL learning. Teachers will focus on the specific modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing in language acquisition. Staff members will develop lessons during the allotted planning time. The staff members will be simultaneously working on areas aligned with the NYSESLAT. Teachers will plan various ESL strategies and activities to be used in the balanced literacy model. We will concentrate on inter-active read-alouds, model reading, shared and paired reading, and shared, paired, and interactive writing. Academic rigor and content vocabulary will play a tremendous impact in vocabulary identification and development. Students' strengths and weaknesses will be assessed, and interventions and academic support will be planned accordingly. Assessment will be ongoing through the work in students' portfolio and continued conferences. 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: We are fortunate to have the Queens South Borough Field Support staff as well as the District 28 superintendent's office.. This year Borough Field Support Center provided support in the use of data when planning and scaffolding instruction for ELLs.. The ENL Team attends these sessions and turn-keys the format to the rest of the staff during teacher team meetings,, Staff Development Days, and during the Professional Development on Mondays. We want to assure the needs of ELLs are addressed. In addition, our assistant principal attend the ENL Leadership Series. The information is shared with the instructional cabinet and professional development is planned for the stakeholders in the school. The school has partnered with an organization called "Consortium" which provides targeted professional development to teachers who provide instruction to English Language Learners. In addition, the facilitator works in the classroom and coaches the teachers on their practice and the impact that it has on student outcomes. Professional development is also provided through Imagine Learning so that our teachers know how to most effectively implement the program that the students will be using during technology lab time. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Imagine Learning will provide professional learning to the families of our English Language Learners. Since the program the students are engaged in holds a site license, children are able to access the program from home and continue to grow and make progress. Another goal for Parent Engagement is to give families effective resources to build literacy and knowledge at home. A Parent Engagement workshop will introduce Read-Home family 1 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Involvement kits from Benchmark for grades 2 - 5. This family kit has informational books in the areas of science and social studies. The Home Guide to family involvement helps improve language arts and content understanding. Students' reading response journals encourage students to respond to text, extend learning experiences, and practice writing skills. Both ELLs and family members are engaged in literacy activities. The date is to be determined later. To also support the parent community parents/caregivers willl receive dictionaries in their native language in order to transition smoothly from their native language to the new English language. Another connection for Title III parents and other members of the parent community encompass the school sponsored activities. For example, Family Bingo, Reading By Twilight, Sports Night, Visit the Arts Night and Math Night bring diverse parents and their children together in a learning and fun environment. These dates are to be determined later. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. three certified ENL teachers, one supervisor and one secretary Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $2222.00  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $8,000.00 Consortium Professional Learning Institute $12,000.00 0 $22,222.00 Imagine Learning none x 2  3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name Horace Harding Borough Queens School Number 206 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Joan L. Thomas Coach Maureen Bilewich/Math Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Frances Chin/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Tatiana Beylis/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Elissa. Garrel/ENL Related-Service Provider Marc Katz/IEP Superintendent Mabel Muniz-Sarduy Assistant Principal Osceola Perez Coach School Counselor Samantha Campbell Parent K Wei Wei Deng (PA) Parent Coordinator Maggie Isdith Field Support Center Staff Member Josh Metz Other (Name and Title) Sarah Klarman ENL teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 575 4 Total number of ELLs 274 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 47.65%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE TBE School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) N/A Teacher teams are in place to support this effort as well as the instructional cabinet and the SchLang. N/A 1. Our school uses a variety of assessment tools to assess and measure the early literacy skills of English Language Learners. Among these K 1 2 N/A N We are pleased 11 ELLs have reached the Commanding status after the administration of NYSESLAT 2015. On the whole, many ELLs have been successful in improving in each of the 4 subgroups of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. This data is reflective from the NYSESLAT Modality report in Our ENL teachers work with identified students during zeEnglish Language Learners within the RTI framework: Teachers are given the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results (accumulated, if applicable) to 3 When we examine and track the data from NYSITELL and /or NYSESLAT, we find many trends that can help Tot # 0 8823 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 PS 206 utilizes grade level teacher teams, vertical teams which address standards deficiencies based on the data At this time our ELLs at P.S. 206 are grouped heterogeneously (mixed proficiency levels). We understand the complexities of accomodating the needs of all ELLs NA NA Prior to the commencing of the Freestanding ENL program, classroom teachers, related service providers, and SAT are given a roste To meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards, ENL teachers collaborate with Content Area Specialists, using research-based At this time at P.S. 206 we only evaluate Spanish ELLs with the Spanish LAB. It determines whether English and/or Spanish is their "dominant" language. We do not have Transitional Bilingual or Dual 6a. Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) will be identified to classroom teachers upon entry to the school community. There is the new LENS questioE:LL-SWDs have access to all curriculum materials and resources as their general education peers. The materials that are used are grade and age appro5 ool Leadership Team. are Fountas and Pinnell Benchmarks, Performance Based Assessments, Fundations Benchmarks (Probes) and various checks for understanding as described in the Danielson Framework for teaching. In addition, there are results from the state mandated ELA, math, and science tests. Data from the ELL Periodic Assessments for Grades 3-5 are utilized. In addition, there ATS. We can chart the results/progress of each ELL/ each modality/each year. This information can be shared with classroom teachers in order for them to understand the language acquisition process and how to help ELLs /others in lesson planning. For example: ELL : Lstg Spk Red Wri Total Decision 2013 14 11 13 2 40 B 2014 19 23 13 10 65 I 2015 17 18 14 6 55 EX Our ELLs in the testing grades 3-5 are prepared for the New York State exams in ELA and Math. Grade 4 ELLs are engaged in the Intergrated Curriculum in Science class and experiments. They are immersed in academic rigor and use strategies that help them to become comfortable with test format and comprehend ro period in their classroom providing intervention using a Tier II model. In addition, our cluster teachers are used in classrooms where there are see what stage of language acquisition each English Language Learner has achieved. Also, educators need to remember the factors that influence language learning acquisition and corresponding academic development. For examples – prior school experience, prior knowledge, exposure to English. They also need to know the RTI implementation for meeting us further drive our instruction. Data patterns across proficiency levels on the NYSITELL and/ or NYSESLAT on the K-5 grades reveal the different stages of language acquisition in the four subgroups of listening, reading, writing, and speaking. In the lower grades we have many EN Entering English Langand inquiry teams. The ENL teachers are important members of all these teams. These teams meet several times a month and their sole purpose is to gather data, look at student work and make adjustments or modifications based on how current practices and programs are impacting student outcomes. with their minimum mandated times as Stand Alone and/or Integrated Curriculum. Five grades have four classes; one grades have three classes. We are contemplating Standalone for EN (180 minutes) with EM (90 minutes) and/or EN and EM for Standalone (180 minutes). Then we can do Intergrated Curriculum in literacy, math, or science. Yet our program schedules consist of total 35 Language classes in place at this time. r of ELLs and former ELLs with their designated proficiency levels - EN, EM, TR, EX, and CM. The staff is aware of the mandated minutes for all concerned whether it's Stand - Alone status and/or Integrated Curriculum ENL. . At this time ENL staff members Ms. Chin and Mrs. Beylis work within the minimum 360 minutes schedule for ENL instructional approaches and methods to make core content comprehensible. Continuous colloboration allow ENL teachers to align their instruction with the classroom instructors and provide scaffolding and language objectives for the ELLs. Integrated ENL is an ENL delivery model in which ELLs receive English instruction in the core content area. The school presently nnaire priate for possible SIFE students. Personnel, as well as other related service providers, will be alerted to and assigned to provide at-risk support for the children. Special attention will be given to strengthen social and academic areas of need. As indicated in the Newcomer category, classroom interventions and (RTI) will be provided for these SIFE children. SIFE students are welcomed into the TItle III ELL After School as they are purchased through the Core Curriculum. Based on a student's ability level, additional resources and materials are used. All students receive 1 period of technology in the computer lab. Smartboards are used in all classrooms. ELLs have the means to access sites such as Starfall, MyOn Reader, Think Central and Starmatica. Additional materials used for these subgroups 6 periods/week. After lunch and preparation periods, we have 25 teaching periods. We definitely need extra ENL specialist to service ALL ELLs this academic year. is a rigorous analysis of the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test administered in the spring. Parents are informed of these results, so they can support their children. Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments are administered three times a year to determine students’ reading levels – Benchmark Independent, Benchmark the language of the test. They understand the importance of the testing procedures, why there are testing modifications, etc. In addition, we measure AYP for ELLs in all grades, K-5 by analyzing how many students on each grade, at each level of proficiency has moved upwards by one or more levels (e.g. from Entering to Emerging, Emerging toTransitional, Transitional to Expanding, Expanding to Commanding larger number of ENL students to provide additional Tier II intervention. English Language Learners needs and showing support for their’ academic results. The process incorporates…1. Universal screening via Home Language Identification Survey 2. Strong Core (Tier 1) instruction which allows teachers and students working together to develop language and literacy skills across the curriculum through meaningful lessouage Learners beginning English as a new language. As they move up, they progress to EM (Emerging) and TR (Transitional) levels They understand and are more comfortable when engaged in social communication. They are building up their phonics, sight words, and reading skills. Finally therstudents. 1. Stand-Alone ELLs (formerly pull-out) receive 180 minutes for language acquisition. 2. Stand-Alone ELLs also participate in the Intergrated Curriculum (formerly known as push-in) for 180 minutes 3. Therefore, the above Entering and Emerging ELLs receive total of 360 minutes. They travel as a group and then are included has Free Standing ENL program in English. The core subjects can be English Language Arts, math, science, or social studies. Two certified teachers can work as a team (co-teaching or parallel teaching) and break up into small groups for differentiated instruction based on the ELLs' data and needs. In the Integrated ENL content area material is made more comprehensible to the ELLs Prograincludm. 6b. Newcomers include any English Language Learners with less than 3 years in the English speakie guided reading leveled books, graphic organizers, visuals, math manipulatives, etc. All ng studenschool system. Our new ELL students are provided with an orientation into their new class setting. Efforts are made to scaffold the classwork appropriate on their level of language acquisition, and they can be paired with a learning partner/buddy. They are given picture dictionaries or translated dictionaries ts receive their mandated IEP services. This is accomplished through compliance reports and the monitoring of the SAT, IEP teachers and administration. For these students, who are ELL-SWDs, the same monitoring is in place and the ENL team works to ensure compliance. P.S. 7  Instructional and Hard. Results provide data to recommend a placement level for instruction. Running record data is translated into progress monitoring and these results are tracked by the administration and the teachers. These running records and the conferences with the English Language Learners allow teachers to track the students’ strengths and weakns. 3. Intensive targeted interventions 4. Progress monitoring of the at-risk students. 5. Communication with parent(s) 6. Content area teacher recommendation. We are fortunate for the DOE in providing information and resources needed in RTI - RTI Guide for Teachers of ELLavailable for both educators and parents. e is the EX (Expanding) level where the advanced English Language Leanrers put “everything together” in BICS and CALPS. They can focus on their vocabulary expansion, thoroughly apply comprehension skills, and share strong writing presentations to spring into the CM (Commanding) level.) Tin the hetergenous group of ELLs across the 5 proficiency levels. 3. Transitional proficiency ELLs and Expanding proficiency students are serviced 180 minutes during Intergrated Curriculum. Content areas can include ELA reading and writing, math, social studies, and science. 4. Our last proficiency level is the Commanding students, who have through various ESL strategies and methodologies. Both staff and ELLs are in awe of the Smartboard technology incorporated to engage all students and create visual schema as a conduit to the lesson. Interactive vocabulary is displayed in the lesson to allow ELLs to access new terminology. TPR and body language help convey meaning and intent during the mini-lesson. Of courseand subject glossaries in their native language, if available. These children are invited to attend the TItle III After School Program. Parents of these students are invited to attend various workshops during Parent Engagement times to support their child's learning. These adults are offered strategies and access to various tools/resources that they can use to work with the children at home. Thereby, this valuable information increases their 206 uses curricular flexibility in allowing the ENL team the ability to immerse ELLs-SWDs in an ENL print-rice, safe, and secure environment. Language can flow positively through reduced fears in making language errors. ENL teachers support the classroom teachers, using the grade curriculum maps with scaffolding according to ability and needs. Integrated Currculum can be either co-teachi8  nesses. With the task in mind, this data also permits differentiated instruction in small group settings. This practice of flexible grouping of the English Language Learner helps in forming differentiated groups in Guided Reading. The goal is for English Language Learners to reach/achieve the next reading level via reading strategies, opportunity for practihough they are proficient, please be aware that language acquisition continues for these English Language Learners. They receive support by participating in integrated curriculum for 90 minutes/week. They are given English Language Learner test modifications at 1 1/2x for two additionpassed the NYSESLAT. They do receive testing modifications 1 1/2 x for two years. The added support they now receive is 90 minutes/week during Intergrated Curriculum. Again, it's in the content areas of ELA reading and writing, math, social studies, and science 5. During Intergrated Curriculum, ENL staff service all students - , content vocabulary and academic rigor are incorporated into both reading and writing lessons. ELLs work in modified guided reading , strategy lesson, and/or close reading with ENL scaffolding and strategies. This academic year staff is receiving professional development in guided reading. Language prompts are set up in the classrooms. These listening prompts, conversation child's English acquisition, as well as their own. Classroom teachers are provided with instructional strategies that need to be implemented to facilitate optimum learning opportunities for the ELL child. There is particular focus on the individual classroom learning environments to ensure that supports are in place for these students. Visual representations are great for ELLs. Language prompts are beneficial for ng or parallel teaching. Class assignments are modified with ENL language acquisition and in conjunction of SWD's IEP support. One widely used application is UDL. It is incorporated in both the classroom setting and ENL application and per IEP. This happens whether in Stand Alone status or Intergrated Curriculum. All ELLs-SWDs are expected to meet the Common Core Standa9  ce and improved confidence in their ability to use reading strategies. At all times, it is our priority to implement a uniform research/standards based, rigorous curriculum for all students. Whether information is based on the NYSITELL and/or NYSESLAT results, there is consistent attention to ensure the active engagement of all English Language Learner studeal years. 2015 Statistics: Current ELLs' Proficiency Levels - 33.7% are Entering, 12.6% are Emerging, 13.8% are Transitioning, 25.9 % are Expanding. As noted above, Entering and Emerging English Language Learners tend to be quiet but are learning to listen and speak. Tall five proficiency levels of ELLs and non-ELL status. It is the concept of Intergrated Curriculum. prompts, reading prompts, and writing prompts enable the ELLs to visualize, to grasp, to understand, and to apply the vocabulary and concepts. For the lower grades ENL emphasis occur in phonology and word wall work. In all these language acquisition activities ENL teachers scaffold instruction through use of modeling and other Sheltered English approaches. We are aware all students. More support include the labeling of items in the room; classroom library with an increased number of native language books; the scaffolding of questioning stratgies; the assignment of peer buddies and team building structures to increase the sensitivity and appreciation of cultural diversity within the school community. Repetition enables these ELLs to speak and gain fluency in pronunciation and reflectirds. ENL specialists use grade-appropriate materials from the curriculum and incorporate them into everyday learning. ENL teachers expand on vocabulary where appropriate and necessary. Visuals and picture clues/cues enhance comprehension. ELL/SWDs are provided multiple entry points into the class lessons…intial picture walks, predictions, class discussions, engaging questions 0  nts in the areas of listening, reading, writing, and speaking. In designing and implementing data driven instruction, NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, Performance Assessments, and state mandated exams will be analyzed and the implications made clear to guide best practices. In addition, there will be a major emphasis placed on differentiating the instruction for all our English Languhey look and listen. They observe and listen. With encouragement, from a buddy and many opportunities to practice, they develop self-esteem and confidence and begin speaking in their new language.. They are gradually building up their reading and writing skills. As they progress to the upper levels, of the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Using the CCSS, rubrics, and tasks, we can work to design coherent lessons with language scaffolding and strategies in order to engage the ELLs in listening and speaking. The engaging questioning techniques can lead to clear understanding of the concepts/task/lesson. Clear understanding can allow independent reading and ability on. 6c Developing ELL subgroup with 4-6 years continued ENL: : These English Language Learners are more comfortable in the social language. They can be provided with additional Response to Intevention (RTI) where they work in small groups for literacy (reading and writing) either during the instructional day/Title III After School Program.) They can continue to acquire content vocabulary, to apply reading strategies, and become and answers, summaries, and/or opinions. Scaffolded techniques can support learning about grade level topics and academic language within each concept. Technology contributes strong support for visual and kinesthetic ELLs-SWDs via the Smartboard and audio/visual programs that complement classroom learning. Students often draw upon on the use of online dictionary tool via Google and iTranslate 1  age Learner students at varying stages of language acquisition, ensuring that pedagogical staff members are well informed and equipped with the necessary resources to address the developmental needs of these students (Newcomers, SIFE, Special Needs, and former ELLs included.) they move up to the transitional level, feeling at ease with social language and getting immersed in academic language and application. We do notice as in the past, students have had many difficulties with reading and reading comprehension. In response to this, we have implemented several schoto compose different styles of writing.. The ELLs' required four modalities/skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing are addressed to the four areas of the Common Core State Standards of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. We can aligned. Reading is one of the most important skills for students to learn. Therefore, we can start building up a strong foundation by familiar and use different writing styles. 6d. If Long Term ELLs with over 6 years of service are assessed and qualify, they work in small differentiated groups for literacy (reading and writing) either during the instructional day and/or Title III After School Program. They are monitored closely as are all other At-Risk students and are offered the full range of intervention services available . 6e. In the new ENL classification, ELLs programs. ENL teachers utilize the Ready Gen texts and teachers' guides in social studies, math, and science ; they modify the content area(s) to support language acquisition during Intergrated Curriculum time. Sample: Fundations: 1 st grade students master letter-sound connections by using and interacting with the initial letter cards for each word from the Teacher's 2  ol-wide supporting techniques which help to reinforce literacy skills taught in the classroom. Within the classroom, consistent monitoring of student progress through close reading, guided reading, strategy lessons, and conferencing is done by each classroom teacher, and extra conferencing using the following: Fundations (WIlson) and Phonics (Ready Gen and Sadlier) programs to develop ELLs' understanding of letter-sound correspondence and the relationships between sounds and their spellings. The materials used in a Stand Alone ENL classroom includes as follows: picture cues, picture charts, rhymes and songs both on CD and audiotapes, colors that coordinate with tasks, who test out of NYSESLAT become the Commanding proficient students. Academic TransitionalSsupport is still provided for them for two extra years in the context of IntergratedCcurriculum They are entitled to 90 minutes/week per Intergrated Curriculum. Per Part 154.2 they are allowed the same test modification 1 1/2 time, as accorded to present ELLs. They are invited to the Title III ELL After School Program and Response to Intervention edition set. For example: A student is invited to say a letter, name a corresponding picture and the that sound that letter gives. (A - apple - /a/). Rest of the students repeat; one person is selected to think of another word beginning with the same sound. Students can use family word cards for creating and practicing rhyming words; stay with same ending; for example bat-cat-fat-mat-3  is facilitated by the ENL teachers for English Language Learner students. Comments pertaining to student progress and areas that need development are now kept in all students. Individual soft. These remain in the classrooms to be used with the students and shared with their involved parents. table and seat assignments. Technology is an important source where staff members take advantage of websites (ELA, math, etc.), online book resources, and teacher methods. Teachers rely on multiple methods from TPR to fine and gross motor cues, pictures, verbal cues like pronunciation emphasis and enunciation, phonics and word work to enhance sound letter recognition. in literacy,. as determined by their ongoing assessments. rat-sat. ELLs /SWDs receive repeated directions and extra time to complete tasks. ReadyGen phonics visuals help to create mini-books for each letter. They practice tracing the letter, write words beginning with said letter, illustrate the pics. ELLs are given assessment sheets from Word Study Notebook and/or superteacherworksheets to see if they have mastered a certain skill ot not. This 4  Additionally, based on data research, we have the interactive word wall in place. Children are exposed to Tier II words through specialized activities. This intensive vocabulary work has shown an increase in reading comprehension among the targeted group. In addition, we have notedata leads to small differentiated groups for either enhancing work or reteaching that skill. Again, ELLs-SWDS receive repeated directions and extra time to complete tasks. In the ENL and general eduation classes, teachers and ELLs often use bilingual glossaries and dictionaries to clarify words and meaning. They relay on translation websites available through NYCDOE internet for classroom use. "Buddy" ELLs are often asked to spontaneously translate a word, concept or idea to a friend and/or newcomer. ENL teachers provide 5  content area support through varied and rich linguistic experiences. They utilize the following: charts, pictorials, images to convey meaning as well as TPR, word for word breakdown and , of course, translation when possible. . d in our state ENL data, that many of our students did not progress from the level of expanding. We saw that this was evident in the area of writing. As a result, our ENL teachers are working with these groups of students to ensure that they obtain the skills and strategies necessary for progress from 6  the level of expanding. Our school continues to nurture student’s love of reading. In order to foster this kind of school environment, we offer family literacy programs such as Reading by Twilight, Parent Association and school sponsored book fairs, Time for Kids subscriptions, 7  Scholastic Book Clubs, MyOn Reader web based program, Super Reader Book of the Month and Article a Day. Specifically for English Language Learners, a targeted group of students are engaged in a web based program called Imagine Learning. Whereas, we acknowledge these improvemen8  ts in reading, our NYSESLAT data continues to indicate student weakness in writing skills. We find that English Language Learner students need to move beyond simple sentence structure (eg. I see) to include more complex and varied sentence structure, more sophisticated vocabulary, and 9  a greater understanding of syntax and grammar. Our school this year was a part of the Teacher's College 100 School Initiative. This initiative allowed teachers to attend professional development at Teacher's College for the different units of writing. Children are engaged in the different 0  units of study incorporated into Writing Workshop. There are special modifications and scaffolds in place for our English Language Learners to support their writing. As a school, we have a joint interest in moving these students forward. We work at incorporating strategies that will help our 1  students improve upon their writing. For example, graphic organizers can help them get their thoughts together. Students can engage in rich and collaborative discussions via active, engaging questioning and discussion. Students can be grouped based on their data and can engage in tasks via DOK levels. O2  n the other hand, in another way of grouping, , a strong student can be the peer leader in guiding his peers in a positive and informative manner. Students can use discussion, questions, feedback, and reflection as a means of completing their task. Writing is an enabling avenue of communicati3  ng and expressing thoughts and feelings. Conferring with a student during writing workshop is looking at the writing one to one together and making suggestions for improvement. It’s providing extra modeling, extra resources, examples, samples, etc. For English Language Learners4  , they understand more with clear Learning Targets, Language Objectives, and modeling. Language patterns, language prompts, and practice can help facilitate their understanding and grasping that concept. According to the spring NYSESLAT results and the NYSITELL scores we have a very larg5  e group of Entering and Emerging. Thus, to start the English New Language acquisition, the classroom teacher and ENL specialist provide a print-rich environment full of high frequency words on the word wall, identifying words around the classroom and repetitive songs, phrases, and directio6  ns for the English Language Learners to listen and repeat in the new language. “Please continue to the Exit sign.” “Please shift to the right.” The teachers work with the English Language Learners in the pre-productive stage of language acquisition. Language prompts/sentence prompts add to 7  TBE The only classes we have in the school are integrated At P.S. 206 because of budget cuts, we Benchmark Literacy Language Intervention for ELLs via RTI We expect to go forwar ELLs are an integral part of the school population. the English Language Learners understanding of the English language. As the English Language Leaners acquire speaking skills, they naturally can develop their reading and writing skills. They can begin the Emerging language acquisition process. Instructional materials, used to assist our EngliNewcomers are paired with native language As reiterated previously in the LAP, communication and collobInstructional materials, used to assist our English During the interview for the Home Language Information Survey none at this time not applicable Professional development is strategically planned to focus on informing all As ELLs begin transition from elementary to middle or junior high Per 2015-2016 ELL Policy Reference Guide parents are strongl4841 8  co-teaching classes. These classes are general education classes with the inclusion of IEP students. Instruction is flexible in that ENL are utilizing the Stand Alone aspect or Intergrated ENL way to meet the needs of diverse ELL/SWDs whether from basic Beginners to Expanding ELLs on the cusp of proficiency. Classroom teachers adjust programs so that all only have one strong Response to Intervention personnel. This teacher, who is certified in Reading Recovery, services lower grades. The ELLs truly benefit in the one to one reading relationship. She also services upper grades with d with school initiatives in ENL instruction and support. They participate in all programs available to all students at this time. During the day, ELLs enjoy computer classes, various activites of physical education, music either from singing in the chorus, recorders, or keyboards, Music Memory competition, and the creativity from art. We look forward to our annual evening Gallery of Art Presentation in June. We sh Language Learners, include a variety of supplementary resources that support the literacy, math, and content area instruction in science and social studies. We use instructional materials to support all ELL subgroups. These include a broad spectrum of print, visual, and digital resource buddies for acclamation to the new school, new food, new language, and new culture. They are constantly reminded to use their glossaries and dictionaries in the classrooms and science rooms. OF course, they need extra time to practice and use this aid successfully. Personnel and parent volunteers are tapped for oration must occur between ENL staff and all teachers. Data is shared for knowledge and lesson plannning. Picture dictionaries, native language dictionaries, and glossaries are provided for the ELLs. Leveled books for guided reading are supplied to the staff in order to support the ELLs in learning vocabulary and reading strategies. Fundations/Wilson materials allow early childhood ELLs to learn and understand the letters Language Learners, include a variety of supplementary resources that support the literacy, math, and content area instruction in science and social studies. We use instructional materials to support all ELL subgroups. These include a broad spectrum of print, visual, and digital resource designed to assist the learner in further with the parent/guardian/caregiver and the child, ENL teacher, or translating staff member, or Parent Coordinator can share the school lay-out and routines of the day. The parent receives a list of school supplies. The guardian is encouraged to ask questions. New family gets a tour of the school - classroom, lunchroom, gym, auditorium, bathroom, entrance, dismissal, etc. We are here to answepedagogical staff of the new ENL and on the power of specialized strategies for strengthening the literacy and academic performance of our ENL students. Sessions can be conducted during grade conferences, common preps, faculty conferences, and assigned professional development opportunities, both in-house and through outside service providers. We now have the Borough Support Center on Rockaway Blvd, which strongly assists our district schools. Support members give ideas, answer quesitons, school, workshops are given for the teachers, the students, and the parents. Parent Coordinator Maggie Isdith conducts orientation workshops at P.S. 206, beginning in October. She shares important issues such as understanding the major differences in the schools - lay-outs, program schedules, and the large number of teenagers. She is the go-between for middle school appliations and middle school appeals. Another issue deals with studeny encouraged to set up appointments to meet with ENL teacher to discuss their child's progress during Parent Engagemnet times on Tuesday afternoons. A translator will be utilized if necessary. Possible questions re assessment? Is the child grasping the language? Is the child improving in the English language? How? Speaking more, reading more, becoming fluent reader, writing skill? Is the student 9  ELLs can benefit from their added instruction during crucial or particularly taxing concepts/vocabulary. So that ELL-SWDs can achieve their IEP goals. To provide access to the academic content and accelerate English language acquisition our ELL-SWDs are mainstreamed into age appropriate classes. They participate in a rigorous curriculum to maximize new Leveled Literacy Intervention program. She has attended professional development to enhance and bring new ideas into instruction. She does turn-key with the staff. We hope to have the other state certified reading teachetheir translated services when necessary. are amazed what the ELLs and general student population "churn up " with their science project exhibits. It's great how the ELLs/mainstream students "shine." Based on research data and teachers' recommendations, ELLs receive RTI services during regular day. We hope to continue the basketball team spirit and fun with our upper designed to assist the learner in further increasing English language proficiency. Teachers and students use Language, Literacy, and Vocabulary series of non-fiction texts. This leveled series has amazing photographs and captions as cues for ELLs' comprehension. We have Readers' Theatre of Fluency r questions, to have the new ELL and new family feel comfortable. and sounds associated with "tapping." Flashcards and games to reinforce literacy skills are beneficial and age appropriate and grade level for the ELLs. Classes in technology, art, math, science, and social studies are always considered in regards to the ELLs' age and proficiency level. increasing English language proficiency. Teachers and students use Language, Literacy, and Vocabulary series of non-fiction texts. This leveled series has amazing photographs and captions as cues for ELLs' comprehension. We have Readers' Theatre of Fluency and Comprehension series. The students enjoy the dialogue exchquiet, shy? How can we work together to help the child feel more at ease in order for the child to participate more in class? All parent communications are recorded in Parent Engagement notebooks; eg. in person meetings, phone calls, letters. annual parent meetings. Professional Learning Opportunity Plan - English as a New Language 2015-2016 October 2017 - ENL (formerly ESL) Breakdown of ELLs per proficiency level Stand Alone (formerly pull-out) and Intergrated Curriculum (formerly pull-in) All teachers (including classroom teachers) are teachers of ELLs Strategies November 2017 - DELLSS Vision - Framework for Great Schools and the English Language Learner Building Capacity - Empowets who like to bully and with students who are bullied. ELLs and other students are encouraged to get along with each other and be sensitive to others/ feelings and needs. Translators are available during these workshops. The number to the Language Transition unit is available via telephone if necessary Also, the guidance counselor Samantha Campbell shares her knowledge and experience to the staff to assist ELLs as 0 r to return shortly. learning via Standalone and/or Integrated Curriculum ENL instruction as specified in CR Part 154. Alternate placement paraprofessional is there to support and assist in her student's instruction and/or explanation. We recognize that students' progress from the Beginning to Transitional proficiency level when they acquire listening and speaking skills. As they graders "the Hawks." It teaches team spirit, team cooperation, and school fun! Go Hawks! ELLs can be elected as members of the school Student Council. During this campaign each nominated candidate speaks in front of the audience of Grades 3, 4, and 5 peers. Each presents his/her platform and tries to persuade the students to vote and Comprehension series. The students enjoy the dialogue exchange. We also have the series of On the Way to English for Grade 2 and Grade 3. We have a collection of Big Books by Rigby and Mondo. Our Leveled library include dictionaries, translated glossaries, and dual langange. We also have the series of On the Way to English for Grade 2 and Grade 3. We have a collection of Big Books by Rigby and Mondo. Our Leveled library include dictionaries, translated glossaries, and dual language books. These materials can be used/tweaked to service Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Exparing the ENL Teacher in a Co-Teaching Model December 2017 - DELLSS Vision - Framework for Great Schools and the English Language Learner Blueprint for English Language Learners January 11, 2018 - Implications for Co-Teachers: Co-Planning is Essential for Integrated ENL - Instructional Moves to Support English Language Learners February 22, 2018 - Six approaches to language learning and examining the role of the they transition from elementary school to middle. The professional development session provided for the staff is "surrounding respect for all," where inclusion of all students irregardless of race, color, religion, etc. is the mode no matter where one is. Students are supported by receiving the same social activities (girls/boys club and chess club) that prepare them to deal with real life social issues. If necessary, teachers, learner parapr1  work on progressing to the Expanding level of ENL acquisition, or work upon becoming Commanding in the English language, ELLs need increased support in reading strategies to further enhance their comprehension and critical thinking skills. They need to also increase the focus on their writing skills and the organization of their thoughts in a logical mannfor that particiular candidate. ELLs do participate in the Math Olympiad under the tutelage of Math Coach Ms. Bilewich. It's a group of students who "love" , of course, math. They do the complicated word problems and must be able to explain the process. Chess club under the eyes of the guidance counselor Ms. Campbell enables the students to learn uage books. These materials can be used/tweaked to service Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, Commanding proficiency groups. These materials are be utilized with SIFE, Newcomers, Developing, Transitioning, Expanding ELLs. Staff, ELLs, and parents take advantage of the site licennding, Commanding proficiency groups. These materials are be utilized with SIFE, Newcomers, Developing, Transitioning, Expanding ELLs. Staff, ELLs, and parents take advantage of the site licenses in My On and Starmatica, Engrade, websites with information and help, based on the Common Core State Standards. We for each approach - Taking a closer look at developing language objectives During professional development on Mondays classroom teachers and ENL staff can learn and understand the new guidelines regarding ELL identification process and Re-Idenfication review since their students can be involved. The ELL Policy and Reference Guide based on Part 154 is very complex. Compliance is very important to make sure our ELLs are serviced correctly and the parents know their ofessionals, and guidance counselor collaborate to have students sit with English speaking students from their own culture to assist them in transtioning with the curriculum and social camaradia . The ELLs are exposed to the same articulation process as the rest of the school population. Teachers are aware that any materials that are handed out can be translated into other languages on the Department of 2  er. It is necessary to increase their awareness and understanding of the various concepts and the use of writing conventions. Due to the increased rigor of the upper grade curriculum content, our English Language Learners require targeted instruction in these areas of ELA, math, social studies, and science to move ahead. Content vocabulary and academic rigor will about chess, think strategy, compete - all in a friendly, cooperative atmosphere. This activity doesn't encourage bullying. The Central Y from Forest Hills has been a part of our school community. One hundred students from grades 3, 4, and 5 participate in after school activites with their counselors. They include homework help, energetic sportses in My On and Starmatica, Engrade, websites with information and help, based on the Common Core State Standards. We strongly encourage ELLs in primary grade to take advantage of the free online Starfall program. Each classroom has a Smartboard to support online instructional materialstrongly encourage ELLs in primary grade to take advantage of the free online Starfall program. Each classroom has a Smartboard to support online instructional materials and resources. The Smartboard technology offers ELLs and general education students a visual, interactive, and engaging arena that encompasrights within ENL program. Another review can be the concept of co-teaching since we have the Integrated Curriculum component (push-in). This philosophy can be used with ENL teacher and specialized science clusters. We can also use Intergrated Curriculum in literacy workshop. The two teachers can plan collaboratively to provide interesting and motivated lessons to all students, including the ELLs and SWDs. This design for coherent planning aims toward engaging all students Education website - Language Translation Unit or by staff members. P.S. 206 is a feeder school to JHS Halsey 157. Grade 5 students tour Halsey and JHS 157 invites parents to their middle school orientation or Open House. As mentioned above, required professional development include 15% on the needs of ELLs. Language acquisition can focus on co-teaching strategies and intergraded curriiculum. This emcompasss 3  move the ELLs forward into the mainstream flow of English Based upon our school's Mission Statement and the LAP initiative, we continue to encourage active engagement in the four modalities of ESL Instruction (Listening, Speaking, Reading, and Writing) within the Common Core State Standards, ESL standards, and learning across the curriculum. We discos, creative cooking, art activites, and entertainment in singing and dancing. This year there is a musician who teaches guitar to two groups of ELLs/students on Thursdays. They learn about the instrument and the beats of the music. Check out their gig at the end of this year's performances in June. As part of the community involvement ELLs come with s and resources. The Smartboard technology offers ELLs and general education students a visual, interactive, and engaging arena that encompasses the learning objectives. The technology person makes sure our ELL computers are working. Technology and technology tools allow langses the learning objectives. The technology person makes sure our ELL computers are working. Technology and technology tools allow language acquisition and content knowledge. In math and science instruction manipulatives and actual simulations provide ELLs with the access to content speciic concepts and in questioning techniques and vigorous discussions in an independent environment. Binders filled with ESL strategies and grahic organizers are still available to help ELLs and other students in small groups of differentiated instrution. Grade leaders have the binders in the classrooms. Also, ENL specialists continue to stress how language prompts benefit English Language Learners in the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Language prompts such as language and content instructional strategies. Another review can be the concept of co-teaching since we have the Integrated Curriculum component (push-in). This philosophy can be used with ENL teacher and specialized science clusters. We can also use Intergrated Curriculum with literacy workshop. The two teachers can plan collaboratively to provide interesting and motivated lessons to all students, includi4  urage teaching in isolation, and our professional development focus is geared towards strengthening the pedagogical interdisciplinary planning and the differentiation of instruction for all students with a particular focus on our English Language Learners. There is awareness that teachers need additional support to guide them in scaffolding instruction for their students as their parents in pajamas for Reading by Twilight. Later on in the school year ELLs participate in upcoming school events such as Math Night and the Spring International Night where they show off their talents in singing and dancing. uage acquisition and content knowledge. In math and science instruction manipulatives and actual simulations provide ELLs with the access to content speciic concepts and principles. Translated dictionaries and content glossaries are available. Additionally, ELLs are receiving service from staffprinciples. Translated dictionaries and content glossaries are available. Additionally, ELLs are receiving service from staff, who are constantly trained in Fundations, Wilson, Special Education tracking. Technology is infused at all levels, and ELL students will have increased opportunities to further enhance their skills utilizing our sentence starters or fill-ins allow students to speak and respond with academic rigor and self-confidence. Another way of learning re ELLs involves the staff in a show and tell. Each participant can present a "best practice" that works for the class and for the ELLs. Staff development is designed to meet the needs of the new teachers as well as the veteran pedagogues. An important element that continues to be reinforced is the need to differentiate and scaffold instruction for all students, including our ng the ELLs. This design for coherent planning aims toward engaging all students in questioning techniques and vigorous discussions in an independent environment. Binders filled with ESL strategies and grahic organizers are still available to help ELLs and other students in small groups of differentiated instrution. Grade leaders have the binders in the classrooms. Also, ENL specialists continue to stress how language 5  well as how to tailor verbal and written directions. Increased opportunities for intervisitation and modeling of appropriate strategies to support the ELL child, are another key consideration as we enhance our best practice. This Mission Statement is for all students - ELLs,ELL-SWDs, mainstream. Instruction Focus -" P.S. 206 our students are engaged in rich and computer lab as well as the portable wireless laptops, if available. , who are constantly trained in Fundations, Wilson, Special Education tracking. Technology is infused at all levels, and ELL students will have increased opportunities to further enhance their skills utilizing our computer lab as well as the portable wireless laptops, if available. English Language Learners and special needs children. Teachers are informed on ways in which the classroom can provide an inviting and nurturing learning environment that supports the building of an ELL's self-esteem and developing confidence in a new language. Topics can include how to implement the Total Physical Resonse (TPR) and Sheltered English supports; how to use language in the service of other learning; eg. planned integration of content and language; how to plan prompts benefit English Language Learners in the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Language prompts such as sentence starters or fill-ins allow students to speak and respond with academic rigor and self-confidence. Another way of learning re ELLs involves the staff in a show and tell. Each participant can present a "best practice" that works for the class and for the ELLs. Staff 6  collaborative discussions through a school wide focus on questioning and discussion. Students will be placed in groups based on their data and engage in tasks that can be measured on a DOK level 2-4. Students will use discussion, questions, feedback and reflection as a means of completing their task." Students in ICT classes learn alongside their mainstream opportunities for meaningful interaction between peers; how to provide opportunities where the child is a "problem solver" rather than an "information receiver"; how to present different models of language that are understandable to the ELL, but also provides a new way of expressing meaning; establishing frequent opportunities for interaction between the teacher and the indivdual student. Teachers are guided in how to develop/enhance reading and writing proficiency and strategies to development is designed to meet the needs of the new teachers as well as the veteran pedagogues. An important element that continues to be reinforced is the need to differentiate and scaffold instruction for all students, including our English Language Learners and special needs children. Teachers are informed on ways in which the classroom can provide an inviting and nurturing learning environment that suppor7  classmates for most of the school day. Teachers use flexible grouping for both ELA and Math subjects. . further assist with listening comprehension and vocabulary development. To ts the building of an ELL's self-esteem and developing confidence in a new languareinterate we will ge. be providing an ongoing direct and indirect professional development to ELL personnel at the jobsite, as well as all those responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELL. This include the administration, the SBST, classroom teachers, cluster instructors, outside service providers, paraprofessionals, and Parent Coordinator. In supporting ELLs in engagement of CCSS, Borough Topics can include how to implement the Total Physical Resonse (TPR) and Sheltered English supports; how to use language in the service of other learning; eg. planned integration of content and language; how to plan opportunities for meaningful interaction between peers; how to provide opportunities where the child is a "problem 8  Support Center provides training in uploading and interpreting data solver" rather than an "information receiver"; how to of the presenELL sand t other differestudents nt to models provide teachers ideas and application for data-driven instruction. Again this leads to our School Mission which is to build up questioning techniques, enable multiple entry points for students in engagement, active discussion, and complete tasks within DOK levels 2-4. One important support session was given by Josh Metz on CR Part 154 on Friday, September 23, 2015. We use the 80 minutes of of language that are understandable to the ELL, but also provides a new way of expressing meaning; establishing frequent opportunities for interaction between the teacher and the indivdual student. Teachers are guided in how to develop/enhance reading and writing proficiency and strategies to further assist with listening compr9  ehension and vocabulary development. professional development time, Chancellor's Conference Days for staff development, and after and during the school day, to provide ELL training for classroom teachers through presentations, as well as the combination of study groups and ELL websites. Topics include The Co-Teaching Model in the Intergrated Curriculum, Creating language objectives from the CCSS, Testing Accommodations for ELLs and Fells. Also, ENL and grade teams articulate the needs of ELLs and ELLs-SWD in planning instruction and 0 in preparing for the NYS ELA, Math, and Science. The entire staff participate in workshops in "Unpacking the Standards," "Differentiated Instruction," and "Guided Reading." . Joan Thomas 206 28Q206 Joan L. Thomas 6/28/2017 Osceola Perez 6/28/2017 Maggie Isdith 6/28/2017 F. Chin 6/28/2017 A. Sanchez 6/28/2017 234 DL Paste response here: Parent involvement is a priority at P.S. 206, and outreach efforts made by the Parent Coordinator, ENL Teachers, Administrators, guidance counselor, SBST, teachers are consistent. Parent Coordinator is a key liaison in forgin1  g and strengthening the home/school relationships for Newcomers, ELLs and their families. Communications and workshops offered to these families are coordinated with the ENL specialists and conducted in multiple languages to reflect our commitment to include all members of the student population. Translators are readily available on a daily basis within our learning comm2  unity to offer support to parents who may not be fluent in English. Again DOE Interpretation and Translation Unit is tapped if necessary. Additional supports and resources are offered to our families in an effort to assist them better in navigating the DOE system and identifying key agencies that could provide further assistance to the student and his/he3  r family. ELL parents need to understand and uses the Engrade - communication between parents and teachers. ELL parents are encouraged to become involved in their child's learning by participating in the various workshops/orientations offered; by attending the programs/events sponsored at the school, and also by volunteering their time to assist in our learning community. There 4  are ELL parents who are encouraged by seeing other ELL parents used as translator volunteers during some of our events. In December there is to be a ELL workshop where parents can learn about resources to enable and support their children. For example, they ask about homework. As the students are accountable in their work folders and confe5 rence soft marble notebooks for themselves, the teachers, and parents, so are the ENL staff who work with the parents of ELLs. Dates, meetings, phone calls, dates and contents need to be recorded in Parent Engagement notebooks T. Beylis/ENL Sarah Klarman DL DL Total 6/28/2017 ENL/Teacher E. Garrel/ENL 6/28/2017 8389 6/28/2017 206 M. Bilewich/Math 6/28/2017 M. Katz, IEP 6/28/2017 Samantha Campbell 6/28/2017 Mabel Sarduy 6/28/2017 Josh Metz 6/28/2017 50 5 206 0 5 0.0 0 0 4307 731.15 -1 0 0 13898 Part III: Assessment Analysis 6  After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 7  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 8  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 9  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 00 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 01  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 02  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 28 School Name: Horace Harding Superintendent: Mabel Sarduy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Magnolia Maureen Frances Tatiana Dominguez-Isdith Parent Coordinator Bilewich Chin Beylis Math Coach ENL teacher ENL teacher no no no no yes yes yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At the time parents register their child at P.S. 206 Home Language Information Survey is a necessary document in the packet. HLIS is a major starting point for collecting data regarding language(s) spoken at home. Entered by the Pupil Accounting Secretary, this information allows the school's parental translation and interpretation to be addressed. In addition, we can view our Home Language Report via ATS to assess which language translations our parent body may require. 03  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabucanian Arabic Bengali Bulgarian Chinese Any Fulani Hebrew Hindi Japanese Korean Nepali English Russian 0 7 4 1 4 1 1 2 1 1 4 472 126 0 0.94 0.54 0.13 0.54 0.13 0.13 0.27 0.13 0.13 0.54 63.27 16.89 1 7 4 1 4 2 1 2 1 1 5 47.1 122 0.13 0.94 0.54 0.13 0.54 0.27 0.13 0.27 0.13 0.13 0.67 63.14 16.35 04  Slovak Spanish Thai Turkish Urdu Uzbek 0 101 1 1 2 17 0 13.54 0.13 0.13 0.27 2.28 1 99 1 1 4 18 0.13 13.27 0.13 0.13 0.54 2.41 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. none Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families School Year 2017-2018 Our school gives out important information about education and special events.to the parent community . Thus, translations of said documents are necessary in order to distribute to the families. They include Curriculum Night - Meet the Teacher, Grandparents Read-Alouds, Welcome Back breakfast, Parent-Teacher Conference announcements, New York State testing dates, notices of PTA meetings, all written communications from the Chancellor and the principal. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All written communication goes home to the parents in English, Russian and Spanish as these are our dominant languages. All letters are translated through google language and they are proofread by our parent coordinator (Spanish) and our ENL teacher (Russian). In addition, all other communications sent home through the Chancellor's Office are in the native language. 05  na na na na na na na na na 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Meet the Teacher Night Student Led Conferences Student Led Conferences parent workshops 9/2017 11/2017 3/2018 ongoing interpretation service(s)? staff translates, technology translation staff translates, technology translation staff translates, technology translation staff translates, technology translation 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. All families register for Remind which is an app that can be translated into their native language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. When the school year opens, our teachers are given a copy of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 so that they are aware and knowledgeable about their role in ensuring that all parents have access to the school and its activities. In addition, teachers work with the ENL teachers to identify the preferred languages of their families. This information is captured on a school contact form which all families complete and all teachers have a copy of. Teachers know that they can ask for translation when necessary and it will be provided. Teachers also utilize their i phones for technology support with translation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 06  As stated, all communications go home in the families preferred language. Signs in the lobby and when you enter the school inform parents of their ability to receive translation to help them at the school when they attend the different events that we host. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We obtain feedback from parents when they come to the school for their mandated ENL training session and through the work of our parent coordinator. 07 
