 School Name: 30Q212 P.S. 212 Principal: CARIN ILENE ELLIS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS 212 343000010212 Pre K - 5 34-25 82nd Street 718-898-6973 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 30Q212 718-898-7068 Fax: Carin Ellis Cellis6@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Carin Ellis Paul Cercone Alex Benavides Katherine Geraghty Elsa Moya NA NA Tracy Brodham District Information Geographical District: 30 Dr. Philip Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, LIC, NY 11101 Superintendent’s Office Address: PCompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-391-8323 Phone Number: 718-391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   North Queens Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: Queens Plaza North, Long Island City, New York Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Carin Ellis Paul Cercone Alex Benavides NA NA NA NA NA Anne Flannigan Miriam Espinal *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   AmandaEttinger Christina Figueroa Katherine Geraghty Christine Trotter Caitlin Mullan NA NA NA NA Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member Member/ Parent Member/ Assistant Principal Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission statement of P.S. 212Q states, "We provide children with a strong educational background in a safe environment. All children can develop self-confidence and a love of learning. We are dedicated to strengthening the home-school connection. We inspire children to learn, to experience and to achieve." This mission statement continues to be the driving force of everything we do here at P.S. 212Q.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 212Q was built in the historical section of Jackson Heights, New York in 2000. When P.S. 212Q was originally built in 2000, the goal was to assist with the overcrowding of other neighborhood schools. However 17 years later, it now houses 750 students in grades Pre-K-5. Historically, our student population has been comprised largely of working class Hispanic families. However, Jackson Heights has become a popular neighborhood due to its proximity to Manhattan. However, Hispanic students still make up our highest non-English speaking population. This diversity is embraced by the entire school community and helps us build strong ties and acceptance within and across cultures. In addition to having students of many different ethnic and religious backgrounds, we also teach students of varying academic and social-emotional levels within a supportive environment. Aside from our rigorous instruction for all of our population, our students attend field trips collectively, eat lunch together, and are involved in extra-curricular activities jointly. Furthermore, we offer peer tutoring programs, monitoring opportunities, a variety of “club” experiences, and so much more in order to ensure that our students are well-rounded citizens within our community and society, at large. To increase our strong family and community ties, we have fostered a close relationship with Hellenic American Neighborhood Action Committee (HANAC). HANAC has provide an after school program for approximately 150 students daily. During the summer, HANAC offers a full day camp program for our children. In addition, PS 212 also enjoys partnerships with CookShop, Music on the Brain, Lincoln Center, Queens College, Joyce Theater, Sanford Harmony, Brain Power, Cornell University, Mindful Schools, LEAP and Junior Achievement. With many of these partnerships, we have invited parents to participate in workshops. Our parent coordinator conducts numerous parent workshops including CookShop providing parents with healthy and easy recipes they can make for their families. In conjunction with the School Wellness grant, our literacy coach offered multiple workshops for students, school staff and parents to practice Mindfulness and Yoga. The staff offers workshops for parents on a variety of topics throughout the year. Some of these workshops are academic, such as how to help their child in school, understanding the GoMath curriculum, homework expectations, computer and ESL classes. Other workshops include Yoga, Mindfulness, Technology Safety, Brain Power wellness and art. This year, every teacher uses Remind to communicate with parents. PS 212 also has a website that is updated monthly. A monthly letter and calendar is distributed to every family. With the success of our Pre-K class, once again we had a waitlist of over 100 applicants, that desired to be a part of the P.S. 212 family. Therefore we opened a second PreK class.These students will experience a high quality Pre-K education by participating in literacy, mathematics, technology, Brain Power, Mindfulness, and Creative Arts. Through play they will learn about the world around them. We now have a Dual Language program in kindergarten through third grade. In these classes, students will be instructed 50% of the time in English and 50% of the time in Spanish. P.S. 212Q continues to foster collaborative teachers. The staff at PS 212 works closely together. Teachers meet formally on Monday Professional Development to plan and share ideas. Additionally, teachers meet informally daily to discuss and reflect on lessons and student performance. New staff talks about the incredible amount of support they receive from their colleagues. Effective use of this planning has allowed teachers to create a rigorous curriculum across all grade levels aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  Within our school, we have at least one ICT and ENL classroom on each grade level. In every classroom, teachers form small rotating groups to meet the various needs of all of the children in the class. The teachers use pre-assessment data to establish groups based on the needs of all students. In the ENL classrooms, there is a wide range of language acquisition levels, ranging from entering to former ELL students. The reading levels in these classrooms also range from students that are far below grade level to students that exceed grade level benchmarks. In the majority of these classes, the teachers incorporate technology to address the various needs of the students. Additionally, students are grouped based on data used to differentiate instruction so that all can access the curriculum. We also have four Dual Language classes: one kindergarten, one first grade, one on second grade and one on third grade. We look forward to a Dual Language class on each grade in the next two years. Within each of our general education classes, we have a completely inclusive academic environment in which students with and without special needs or English as a New Language are educated together. In addition to these classes, we have four self-contained Special Education classrooms. Many of the children require speech, physical therapy, occupational therapy, adaptive physical education and counseling during the school day. The children attending our special education classes receive instruction based on their IEP. All students in these self-contained classes are below grade level in all academic areas. To help support these students, individual behavior plans are developed based on need. The children received extra literacy support based on their Teacher's College Just Right Levels, DIBELS assessment and schoolwide benchmark results. Student's work in literacy and math is based on child's level of instruction. Some children receive a double dose of Fundations/Wilson daily. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the 2015-2016 Quality Review, for indicator 4.2 the reviewer found that teacher teams were engaged in collaborative practice to improve classroom practice. The reviewer stated that “shared leadership has yielded a culture where the staff feels valued, thus empowering them. Teachers work collaboratively to provide a rigorous, engaging and coherent curricula that is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. In order to increase student achievement and reach the Department of Education's Universal Literacy initiative where all students reading on grade level by the end of second grade, we will continue to focus on students in the lower grades (K-2). Organizational changes were made to support the teachers in the early childhood grades. This year, administration and our Literacy Coach will work collaboratively with the grades K-5 to ensure that the curriculum is rigorous and engaging for all students through the implementation of higher order questions and discussion opportunities on a daily basis including Advanced literacy skills. In addition, we strive to have students participate in experiences, in and outside of the school building, that will broaden their knowledge base. We will utilize our RtI teachers to target children in the younger grades that require RtI services. In doing this, we hope to provide support in the foundational skills every student needs to be successful in every area of their academic career. Initial students are identified in June 2018 based on running records, DIBELS end of year assessment in grades K and 1, GoMath formal assessments, and teacher observation in all subject areas. In targeting the students in the lower grades early in the year, we aspire to make the needed gains in order for these students to be on grade level by the end of the school year. As these students have already been identified, they will start receiving Tier 3 RtI services the fourth full week of school. Since opening its doors, P.S. 212Q prides itself on the safe and nurturing environment provided for each member of the school community. This is evident in the overwhelmingly positive responses of parents and teachers on questions pertaining to school environment on the NYC School Survey. 97% of parents stated that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school (Q1c) and 100% of teachers stated that they work closely with families to meet students' needs (Q9). In collaboration with the PTA we have provided home furnishings, clothing, shoes, Halloween costumes, warm coats, leads on apartments and jobs for the families of P.S. 212Q. The students of P.S. 212Q know they have an adult they can trust that will take care of them, whether it be their classroom teacher, a cluster teacher, guidance counselor, school psychologist, school aide, parent coordinator or administration. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q212 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 784 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 37 36 25 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 4 21 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 58.0% % Attendance Rate 56.1% % Reduced Lunch 15.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 61.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 10.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.07 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 58.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 96% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 78 77 94.4% 1.5% 15.4% 0.4% 26.1% 2.0% 4 0% 6.3 58.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P.S. 212Q teaching staff collects data from a variety of sources in order to tailor the curriculum to meet the needs of all learners. In 2015-2016SY, we instituted Fundations for kindergarten to second grade that addressed foundational phonemic skills. For the past three years, we have administered DIBELS as a diagnostic screener for our kindergarten and first grade students. The data from this diagnostic screener revealed that in 2017-2018SY students in need of intervention in kindergarten and first grade. 36% of kindergarten and 41% of first grade students scored in the strategic or intensive level and were below in their Teacher's College reading levels. The end of the year DIBELS data revealed, 17% of first grade students remained in the intensive or strategic levels and 21% of our kindergarten students remained at the strategic or intensive level. Due to the success in using the DIBELS data to create targeted instruction for students, we will continue this model for the 2018-2019SY. Our plan moving forward is to institute small group interventions at the beginning of the school year for targeted first and second grade students and entering kindergarten students. All DIBELS data will be supported by reading comprehension data as measured by Teacher's College running record assessments and sight word fluency data. As in years past, small groups are created based on skill deficits in grades revealed in the Teacher's College running record assessments in grades two to five. For the past four years, AIS teachers have used Leveled Literacy Intervention as a tool to assist students' reading strategies and comprehension. This intervention lead to an increase in students meeting the end of the year benchmarks for their reading level. By the end of the 2017-2018SY, 25% of students in grades two to five were below grade level in their reading level. Data from the New York State English Language Arts assessment show that overall we increased 20% from 33% in 2015 to 53% in 2018 and our trend is continuous progress. That being said, we need to address the 47% of students who are not achieving a level 3 or 4. We recognize the need for small group instruction that specifically targets the five major areas of reading achievement as identified by the National Reading Panel : phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, guided oral reading, explicitly teaching vocabulary words and reading comprehension strategies. In order to address these areas in all grade levels (K-5), we need to implement station teaching and text-based and inquiry-based discussion protocols. We will measure the efficacy of these strategies via DIBELS, Teacher's College running record assessments, and unit assessments. To support this year's goals, our plan will also incorporate a variety of resources from the Florida Center for Reading Research and American Institutes of Research NYS RtI project, which provides research-based strategies for implementing small group work supporting skill development in all areas of reading. We will incorporate inquiry based discussion protocols from Expeditionary Learning on Engage NY. We will utilize two guiding documents from the NYC Department of Education CIPL Professional Learning Series: Word Work and Word Play A Practice Guide for Vocabulary Instruction in K-12 Classrooms and Reading with Power and Passion: Resources to Support Independent Reading. Additionally, we will continue to include the five Hallmarks of Advanced Literacies Instruction outlined in Teaching Advanced Literacy Skills by Lesaux and Galloway. Our focus will include working with a variety of texts, using talk, discussion, and expanded writing to build language and knowledge, the study of high-utility vocabulary words, 3  and using school-wide protocols to support reading, writing, listening, and speaking. Rotation stations allow students to learn in a range of modalities, while making differentiation manageable for one teacher. For example, one station could be a collaborative station whereby students read an article, they can work together to analyze the claims the author makes within the text. From the GreatBooks Foundation: Shared Inquiry™is a method of teaching and learning that enables people of all ages to explore the ideas, meaning, and information found in everything they read. It centers on interpretive questions that have more than one plausible answer and can lead to engaging and insightful conversations about the text. And it is based on the conviction that participants can gain a deeper understanding of a text when they work together and are prompted by the skilled questioning of their discussion leader. According to the New York City School Survey Measures 90% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes feel challenged. (Q19a). 100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that in planning their last instructional unit for general/self-contained/literacy/science/social studies, they had the resources and tools they needed to include multiple opportunities for students to interact with complex grade-level text. (Q15c) 80% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes use data or text references to support their ideas. (Q18b). Students will have the opportunity to work on their level with differentiated lessons and materials. Students will participate in shared inquiry, led by their peers to help develop higher order thinking skills, while sharpening reasoning skills through discussion. School-wide protocols will be used to increase student achievement across all content-areas. Progress monitoring will be ongoing as will student self-assessment. Exemplars will be employed to guarantee that children are able to work on complicated problems and share their reasoning with peers. Our goals are fully aligned to the Framework for Great Schools and the Quality Review Rubric where our 2015-2016 Quality Review revealed ratings of: * 1.1 Ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards was rated Well Developed. * 1.2 Research based, effective instruction that yields high quality student work was rated Proficient. * 2.2 Align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels was rated Proficient and an Area of Focus * 3.4 Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations was rated Well Developed and an Area of Celebration. * 4.2 Teacher teams engaged in collaborative practice using the inquiry approach to improve classroom practice which was rated Well Developed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 4  By the end of June 2019, students will show growth across all content areas by using rigorous instruction, such as station teaching, inquiry-based discussion and school-wide protocols as evidenced by an increase of student achievement from pre and post assessments using standard based rubrics and exemplars. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will administer Teacher's College running records four times a year.. All students Sept. 2018 Administration Nov. 2018 Teaching Staff Mar. 2019 June 2019 Teachers will administer DIBELS Next three times a year. All K and 1 students Sept. 2018 Teaching Staff Teachers will use the data from the DIBELS assessment, Teacher's College running records to create targeted small groups based on areas of need. Mar. 2019 June 2019 All students Sept. 2018 Teaching Staff Letters detailing their child's progress in the DIBELS assessment will be backpacked home. Suggestions of activities for parents to implement at home will be included. All K and 1 students parents AIS/PPT/RtI team will use data from multiple sources to create a targeted instructional plan with progress monitoring for students that are struggling with the core curriculum using a push-in/pull-out model. All students Dec. 2018 Feb. 2019 April 2019 Sept. 2018 Teaching Staff June 2019 Administration Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administration Support Staff School-based Support Team Teaching Staff IEP teacher IEP teacher Using DIBELS data, first grade students will participate in small group instruction during the school day to address the areas of need through another period of Fundations instruction. First grade targeted students Oct. 2018 to Nov. 2018 *6 week cycle 6  Students will be assessed using DIBELS to determine success in the use of a "double dose" of Fundations. The results will be backpacked home to families. First grade targeted students throughout the school year Nov. 2018 Teaching Staff After each 6 week cycle IEP Teacher Using the data from multiple sources, students will be invited to before and after school programs for a six week cycle meeting three days a week targeting areas of need, using researched based programs such as Fundations. After the six week cycle, students will be progress monitored to determine if the intervention was successful or if further invention is needed. This information will be backpacked home. Parents will be invited to a series of workshops to learn the new strategies and curriculum in each grade for the various content areas. The literacy coach will provide workshops for parents on skills necessary to learn to read, focusing on the advanced literacy skills students will be learning in their classrooms. Classroom teachers will review online programs to help students improve their reading levels. Programs such as Raz-kids and Headsprouts will be employed. Parents Administration All students Oct. 2018 to Administration June 2019 Teaching Staff All parents of Nov. 2018 to June 2019 Teaching Staff students in intervention programs Parents Administration Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Literacy Coach Teaching staff Teachers and administrators will participate in workshops and workshop series offered by the Field Support Center. Materials and strategies will then be shared and turn-keyed to the entire staff. All staff Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Literacy Coach Teaching staff Teacher teams and administration will familiarize themselves with the new Next Generation Learning Standards in English Language Arts and Mathematics. All staff Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Administration Literacy Coach Teaching staff Administration Teacher teams and content specialists will plan and execute station teaching activities for all students. All students Oct. 2018 to Teaching staff Classroom inter-visitations will be scheduled to enable teachers to observe station teaching in progress. All staff June 2019 Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Literacy Coach Teaching staff Administration Teachers in grades K - 2 will develop and implement effective phonics focused stations for all students to strengthen their early literacy skills: phonemic awareness, sound-symbol relationships, sight word fluency, decoding (segmenting and blending), comprehension, vocabulary, and reading fluency. All students Oct. 2018 to K-2 Teaching staff June 2019 Teacher teams will review engagement and discussion protocols during Monday professional development. Protocols will be All students Oct. 2018 to Literacy Coach June 2019 7 instituted across all classrooms. Teachers will reflect on the efficacy of each protocol and provide each other with actionable feedback. Teaching staff Teachers will incorporate inquiry-based discussion across all content areas. Students will become familiar with all routines necessary to conduct an effective discussion. All students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Literacy Coach Teaching staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. After each assessment, letters will be sent home to parents by administration indicating their child's level and suggestions to assist their child at home. We will also include useful links on our school website that students and parents can access at home to help their children strengthen their foundation skills in reading and mathematics. By November 2018 and March 2019, scores from just right reading levels will be shared with families and analyzed by staff using TCRWP benchmarks to identify students not meeting grade level benchmarks and create inventions for each of these students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. During our bi-weekly AIS/PPT/RtI meetings we will check on student progress. We will utilize monies to create before and after school programs. We will schedule AIS/RtI periods into teachers' schedules to be used to push-in and work with struggling students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Scores from just right reading levels, DIBELS and JRL assessments will be collected and analyzed at least three times during the year (Nov., March and May/June). By November 2018 and March 2019, the AIS/PPT team will analyze the reading level results based on TCRWP benchmark to create six week RtI groups. Students will be progressed monitored using Leveled Literacy Intervention and DIBELS progress monitoring. By December 2018 and March 2019, teachers will analyze the effectiveness of one project-based learning activity and outcome with their teacher team as measured by a teacher-made rubric aligned to various content standards and reflection sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher's College Reading Benchmarks DIBELS Benchmarks Teacher made rubric aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards for assessments 8  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? PS 212Q’s mission statement states, “We provide children with a strong educational background in a safe environment. All children can develop a self-confidence and a love of learning. We are dedicated to strengthening the home school connection.” As a school community, we focus on the whole person, not just academics. This is evident in the many programs and opportunities we have for all stakeholders. According to our 2015-2016 SY Quality Review, PS 212Q was awarded a rating of well-developed in indicator 3.4 which states that the school establishes a culture for learning that communicates high standards to staff, students, and families, and provides supports to achieve those expectations.” Not only was this indicator rated well developed, it is was also an area of celebration. The reviewer stated, “Teachers share that the administration supports their development through frequent professional learning focused on high expectations for all students.” Furthermore, ongoing feedback is provided to families that outline the curricula and assessments. Parents stated to the reviewer that the school works diligently to create a supportive environment by providing multiple opportunities to support their children at home. Teachers utilize the Parent Engagement time to meet with parents to establish “partnerships in order to support students’ progress towards college and career readiness.” In addition, on the 2017-2018SY School Survey, 96% of parents/guardians agreed that school staff regularly communicated with them about how they can help their child learn. According to our 2016-2017 School Survey, 100% of the teachers responded that adults in the building help students develop the skills they need to complete challenging coursework despite obstacles. In addition, 95% of teachers responded that they teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (i.e. by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior, and feelings) (Q20g). However, only 89% of teachers recognized disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities. We believe that our school should now be focused on overall wellness and social emotional learning. Our focus aligns to the Quality Review Rubric 1.4 which states that schools will maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults. PS 212 prides itself on providing a nurturing supportive environment to all members of the school community. It is our belief that children can only learn if they feel safe and supported. A host of social-emotional and character education programs along with the Thrive NYC program will be used to improve the social and emotional health of our students, staff, and parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 0  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will continue to build on what the staff has gleaned by focusing on the social-emotional intelligence of all stakeholders measured by reflections sheets and testimonials after workshops provided by in house and community-based organizations. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sanford Harmony - Teachers will continue to implement this program in the components of Morning Meeting and unit assignments. Pre-k to 5 Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Sanford Harmony Trainers Guidance Counselor Social Worker School Psychologist Principal Assistant Principals Trained staff All school staff Sept 2018 - June 2019 All Staff Sept 2018 - June 2019 Staff Mentors Field Coordinators Selected staff members Literacy Coach/Mindfulness instructor Selected teachers Brain Power Wellness tools will be used in each classroom from PreK to 5th grade to help create a supportive environment. Parents will participate in workshops presented by the staff of Brain Power and our staff. Mentor teachers will continue to meet each month to develop weekly activities to be used in the classroom. Mentors will also lead Brain Power activities with the staff before beginning our Monday Professional Development/ School Wellness Council - Members will meet on a monthly basis to create an environment in which our school can holistically and systematically prioritize PE and health education as cornerstones of school wellness, while also creating more opportunities for physical activity, nutrition, and health related improvements across the entire schools community. 2  Yoga for students: teachers have been trained in either of the following researched based resources to assist students in dealing with various emotions:  Yoga4Classrooms Little Flower Yoga   Yoga Foster Committee of staff Sept 2018 - June 2019 Literacy Coach/Mindfulness instructor/Yoga Instructor Administration Guidance Counselor School Based Support Team Liaison Selected teachers Students All Staff Administration Classroom Teachers IEP Teacher L.I.V.E. - Lessons in Value Education This curriculum addresses the NYCDOE’s Academic and Personal Behaviors. Values of the month are taught by teachers and celebrated with students and parents at monthly PTA meetings. Anti-bullying program - Anti-Defamation League’s: No Place for Hate/A World of Difference. Lead by the IEP teacher, a group of students will create activities for the school community for the purpose of informing and empowering all stakeholders in dealing with bullying across all formats, verbal, cyber, physical. Beautiful Me - Female students from grade 2 - 5 will be trained in confidence building activities, empathy, positive self-image and the skills to say no. Groups of 8 to 10 girls will participate in workshops after school or during club time on Fridays. Female parents will participate in Beautiful Me workshops. The Hance Foundations will provide workshops on raising emotionally healthy children. All Students All students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Sept 2018 - June 2019 Sept 2018 - June 2019 3  Power Play - After school physical education and social learning program. This is an organization that provides two on-site coaches who empower girls through socialization and physical activity. Newcomer social group - English Language Learners new to our school and community meet once per week with the school counselor to discuss how they are adapting to a new country. Social Groups - Students meet once per week during lunch time with their peers to engage in positive social experiences. Through social stories and discussions, students with difficulty in social settings are provided with tools to help them cope and develop life skills and interpersonal skills. School wide enrichment model clubs - Students in grades 4 & 5 have the option of selecting two enrichment clubs that meet once per week. Students will be grouped based on their choices in mixed ability groups. Students will participate in activities, such as Theater, Robotics, Anti-Bullying, Crocheting, Yoga/Mindfulness, and Zumba to name a few. Girls in grades 2 - 5 Female Parents Sept 2018 - June 2019 Girls in grades 1 and 2 October 2018- May 2019 Teachers & Guidance Counselor trained by the HANCE Foundation All newcomer ELLs Administration Power Play Coaches SWDs and other selected students Once a week October - May in 4 week cycles or longer if necessary Guidance Counselor Once a week from 4  Social Stories - In partnership with the school psychologist, special education teachers present social stories to students with disabilities on a variety of topics to support their social-emotional growth. Cognito a computer based program will provide workshops for teachers to help diffuse situation with students, help children make calm decisions, and foster a stronger relationship between staff, parents and children. Grade 4-5 students PTA and 4th grade teachers will promote hygiene for the students. Students discuss with classroom teachers and other staff the need for proper hygiene as they get older. Students are separated by gender preference. Students are given a hygiene gift bag at the end of the discussion that is provided by the PTA. Students with disabilities grades K-5 October 2018- May 2019 Social Worker Administrator Classroom teachers October - June Cycle 1 October to January Cycle 2 February to June Cluster Teachers Sept.2018 - June 2019 Volunteers May 2019 School Psychologist All students and parents 5  4th grade students Thrive New York will provide mental health consultants to provide resources for the PS 212 community based on a needs assessment. The consultants will find resources to provide workshops on parenting skills, health providers, and organizations. All students and parents Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Special education teachers Computer teacher Early childhood teachers. 4th grade teachers PTA members Guidance Counselor School psychologist Principal Thrive consultant 6 Middle School articulation and parent workshop: Parents are invited various time throughout the year to meet with the Guidance Counselor to go over the middle school process. The Guidance Counselor also meets with the 5th grades to assist with the middle school application process. Grade 5 students and parents November 2018; January 2019; April/May 2019 Guidance Counselor Guidance Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed of all social-emotional programs on an on-going basis throughout the school year and will be invited to workshops. The parent coordinator will be responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : ● All classroom and cluster teachers, literacy coach, assistant principals, and principal. Schedule Adjustments: ● We will provide Monday Professional Development time to engage in a Brain Power Wellness activity as provided by Brain Power teacher mentors. ● We will offer once monthly common preparation period to our Brain Power teacher mentors (six teachers) to plan staff development and student engagement activities. Instructional Resources : ● We will utilize the Google Drive platform to share resources with the entire staff. ● We will utilize the Microsoft OneDrive platform to share a calendar of activities with the entire staff. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 7  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will provide participants the same reflection/survey in November, January, March and May to identify growth in socio-emotional skills. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. GoogleForms and Surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P.S. 212Q values time needed for collaboration of the teaching staff. Teacher teams, vertical and horizontal in nature, meet on Monday afternoons for inquiry work to find activities to meet the needs of all students. Additionally, the administration set up committees in ENL, Special Education, Dual Language, Technology, Science and Social Studies. These committees met once a month to share best practices and look at the Next Generation Learning Standards through the lens of the specific committee. Although teachers are mandated to meet every Monday afternoon, the majority of teaching staff at P.S. 212Q meet together voluntarily during their preparation period. Additionally, the Literacy Coach is available to meet with the teacher to look at their unit plans and make adjustments based on the needs of the students. According to the NYC School Survey 2017-2018SY, when asked about peer collaboration, 97% of our teachers reported that the teachers designed instruction programs together (Q8a). Furthermore, 92% of teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their instruction across grades (Q8b) and 100% of teachers talk about instruction with their colleagues (Q8d). These responses were 7% higher than other schools in our district as and 6% higher than all schools across New York City. Each grade met in June 2018 to plan each unit in all content areas for the upcoming school year. Teachers requested more time to look at current unit plans and create differentiated activities for the all students. For the upcoming school year, we plan on using our professional development time on Mondays allow teachers to examine student work and plan accordingly to meet the needs of all learners and ensure that all content is being taught throughout the school year. Additionally in our 2015-2016 Quality Review, the review stated that teacher teams engaged in collaborative inquiry that supported goals and strengthened teacher capacity. This goal aligns fully to the Framework for Great Schools, as well as the Quality Review Rubric: 1.1 Rigorous, engaging, and coherent curricula aligned to CCLS 1.2 Research based, effective instruction that yields high quality student work 1.4 Maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults. 2.2 Curricula-aligned assessment practices that inform instruction 3.4 Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations. 4.1 Observe teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection. 9  4.2 Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of June 2019, through collaboration in vertical and horizontal teacher teams, teacher teams will create differentiated activities across all content areas to meet the needs of all learned as evidenced by updated unit plans, pacing calendars, and notes from Mondays professional development. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams will meet on Mondays to plan and share differentiated activities for students in all content areas to support station teaching for each unit of study. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teaching staff Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Administrative team Lead Teacher Administration One lead teacher and assistant principal will attend monthly professional developments offered by District 30 to continue to implement the four hallmarks of Advanced Literacy instruction. All Teaching Staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 ENL staff will meet monthly to share best practices, ensure alignment to the Next Generation Learning Standards, review regulations, maintain compliance and address compliance issues, and share strategies and techniques to ensure success. This will also allow for vertical alignment to ensure coherence across grades. ENL staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrative team Coaches ENL Teachers ENL lead teachers will share ENL strategies with their teacher teams to create scaffolds in current units of study and allow students to access the Next Generation Learning Standards for ELL and F-ELL learners. Special education staff will meet monthly to share best practices, review regulations, Next Generation Learning Standards, review regulations, maintain compliance and address compliance issues, and share strategies and techniques to ensure success. This will also allow for vertical alignment to ensure coherence across grades. Special education staff All teaching staff Oct. 2018- June 2019 Administrative team ENL Teachers Classroom Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administrative team Psychologist, Special Education staff OT/PT Staff, Speech Staff Special education lead teachers will share strategies their teacher teams to create scaffolds in current units of study and allow students to access the Next Generation Learning Standards for students with disabilities. All teaching staff Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administrative team Special Education Teachers Classroom Teachers 1  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. To ensure coherence among the grade, teachers will utilize the school website to inform parents of the current units of study in all content areas. The parent coordinator and teachers will use Parent Engagement time on Tuesday and various mornings to provide parents with strategies they can use to assist their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : ● All classroom and cluster teachers, literacy coach, math coach, assistant principals, and principal. Schedule Adjustments: ● We will provide Monday Professional Development time to schedule cycles of learning based on analyzing student work across the content areas. ● We will offer twice weekly common planning periods on all grade levels Pre-K-5 for teachers to meet with the literacy coach and teachers on their grade and to turnkey professional learning to their respective grade levels. ● PD Committee and administration will create a calendar for monthly professional learning cycles for all staff. Financial Resources : ● We will allocate funds for substitute teacher coverage for teachers to attend professional development workshops and conferences and June planning days. ● We will seek out free professional development resources via Field Support Center, grants, the UFT Teacher Center, and university outreach that are aligned with our school’s overall goals. ● We will coordinate and host a cross-district professional development debriefing and sharing day. Instructional Resources : ● We will utilize the GoogleDrive and OneDrive platform to share resources with the entire staff, RtI website and literacy coach's website. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2  Administration will meet with grade leaders in December, March and May and examine unit plans and notes from Monday PDs to ensure that all teaching staff is differentiating instruction. Additionally, administration will examine Advance scores in domains 1e and 3c in November, January and March. Using these checkpoints, we will provide teachers time for inter-visitations to view the implementation of differentiated instruction across all content areas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance- specifically in Domain 1e and 3c Reflection Sheets from Monday PDs Units of Study Pacing Calendar with adjustments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At P.S. 212Q, the majority of our teachers are rated effective or higher in their Measures of Teacher Practice. The administration encourages staff to pursue their passions and share them with the rest of the community. We strive to provide motivation for each teacher to pursue the highest level of Domain 4 and grow in their own personal teaching practice. For the 2017-2018SY, 56.96% of our teaching staff received a highly effective rating in their observation, which is an increase from the prior year of 14%. Additionally, 39.24% of teachers received an effective rating in their observations. In the 2017-2018SY, teachers across grades were sent to professional learning series offered by the Queens North Field Support Center. Many of the teachers returned from these professional learning series and implemented strategies they learned about in their own classrooms. Additionally, teachers were encouraged to share out what they learned with the whole teaching staff. The administration received a positive response from the teaching staff regarding these share-out sessions. According to the NYC School Survey 2016-2017SY, 92% of our teacher reported that their professional development experiences included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas. However, in the 2017-2018SY, the response from teachers dropped to 76%. Additionally, 82% of the staff reported that they had opportunities to work productively with colleagues at our school. This was a 8% decrease when the same question was asked in the year prior. Although the data from this survey reflects a decrease in the quality of the professional development of the teachers, 89% stated that they were eager to try new ideas in their classrooms (Q1d) and 100% of the teachers stated that they were responsible that all students learn (Q1e). Building on this desire to try new ideas in the classroom, we have created a plan for the 2018-2019SY that utilizes the Monday Professional Development time to as a means for teachers to share what has worked in, such as differentiated activities, protocols to promote student-led discussions or checks for understanding, their classrooms within their teacher teams. In an effort to continue to build distribute leadership among the staff and build on District 30's Advanced Literacy initiative, we plan to continue to provide teachers opportunities to attend professional learning offered by District 30 and Queens North Field Support Center. The administration and professional development committee created a calendar for Monday professional development for 2018-2019SY with a focus on examining at student work and adjusting unit plans based on student work as well as time to think, try and evaluate their own teaching practice based on student outcomes in various lessons. Additionally, we strive to provide teachers time to share out "best practices" By empowering the teachers to share what they have experienced working within their classrooms with their colleagues, the administrative team hopes to promote distributive leadership, as well as time to think carefully about, try and evaluate new ideas among the entire staff. The goal of P.S. 212Q is to provide and build teacher leadership capacity in our staff and for the administrative team to encourage and coach all staff members to excel in their teaching capacity. Teachers will also be encouraged to share with parents ways that they can help their children at home using some of the strategies they have found successfully used in the classroom during Parent Engagement on Tuesday afternoons. According to the 2015-2016 Quality Review, the reviewer found that there were embeded distributed leadership structures that influence key decisions. This goal aligns fully to the Framework for Great Schools, as well as the Quality Review Rubric: 4  1.3 Aligns resources used to support instructional goals that meet students’ needs. 1.4 Maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults. 3.1 School level theory of action and goals shared by the school community. 3.4 Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations. 4.1 Observe teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection. 4.2 Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of June 2019, teachers will foster personal leadership growth by attending and effectively turn-keying outside workshops with the staff sharing what they learned as evidenced by an increase of 3 percentage points in the effective and highly effective rating using the Danielson Framework for Teaching Domain 4e . 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teaching staff will be provided a menu of upcoming professional learning series offered by Queen North Field Support Center and have the opportunity to attend. Teachers will be provided with a professional development calendar for Mondays PDs to promote coherence across the entire teaching staff. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teaching Staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team All staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team Upon completion of a professional learning opportunity, teachers will be provide time turn-key what they learned to the staff. All staff RtI Team will meet twice monthly to discuss student needs and create an action plan. Students work, Just Right levels, Diebels and I ready will be used to assess the children's needs. RtI Team Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Professional Development Committee Teachers Principal Assistant Principals RtI Team Rti Team RtI Team will lead at least 2 professional learning sessions for the teaching staff. Staff will learn about best practices in addressing the needs of at-risk students including students with disabilities, English Language Learners, and exceptional students. Brain Power Wellness mentor teacher team will meet once monthly to plan a weekly calendar of Brain Power events for all students and to plan out monthly professional learning activities for all staff. Parents will participate in at least one Brain Power Wellness workshop that is lead by the Brain Power coach and students. The literacy coach will provide a series of workshops for parents on how to support their children by explaining the process in which children learn to read. The Science teachers will run a workshop for parents and their children using STEM activities and explaing the new Amplify curriculum. ENL teachers will provide workshops for parents explaining the process for identifying ENL students and how to immerse their children in the English language. All staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 All Staff and students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Brain Power Wellness teacher mentors Parents Sept. 2018 May 2019 Brain Power Wellness coach Students Literacy Coach Lead Teacher 6 Special education staff will explain to parents the IEP process and how to read an IEP. Parents will be taught their rights and the support services provided by the DOE. Brain Power Wellness mentor teacher team will present a weekly activity at the start of each professional learning activity. All Staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Brain Power Wellness teacher mentors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will provide parents a monthly calendar with opportunities to attend workshops provided by the teaching staff. We will also have the parent coordinator send out emails reminding parents of upcoming workshops as well as send out phone recording on School Messenger. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources, such as teachers that are identified as leaders in a given area Instruction resources such as curriculum units and researched based strategies for struggling students Queens North Field Support Center District 30 Support Staff Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administrative team and professional development team will meet in December to adjust the PD schedule for the rest of the year based on teacher attendance to outside professional development. In February, the administrative team will examine the data on Advance to ensure that we are on task to meeting this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas from Monday PDs Teacher attendance of various PLS offered by Queens North Field Support Center and District 30 resources 7  Advance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parental involvement at school events is a key part of a child’s success in school. Although, we have a dedicated and active PTA Board, our overall attendance at PTA meetings and family membership continues to be lower than our expectation. The average attendance at PTA meetings for 2018-19 was ten parents (including the PTA). We will continue to promote a strong home-school connection by building the capacity of our parents as key stakeholders in their child’s/children’s education. We plan to offer varied parent engagement workshops, many of which include the students, so that our parents gain knowledge of how to best support their child/children both academically and socially. We have a dedicated and knowledgeable staff, who will partner with parents at these events. Utilizing data from attendance taken at our events, our parent coordinator held on average four events a month, such as CookShop for Families and Cornell Nutrition workshops. Plus the school provides events such as "Meet the Teacher," Parent-Teacher Conferences, Pajama Day, and Chorus concerts, Dance Performances,which have high attendance, 400 parents on average. Other events that were held for the families that were successful were STEM activities for parents and their children and the Mother's Day Tea. Building on these successful events, we see a need to offer additional events during school and after school that allow parents to participate in their child's education alongside their child. Data that supports these statements as sourced by the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide: 95% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn. (Q1a) 95% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. (Q1b) 97% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school. (Q1c) 9  98% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that their child's school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. (Q1h) 96% of parents/guardians responded that they are somewhat or very likely to go to a regularly scheduled parent-teacher conference with their child's teacher. (Q6b) 94% of families say that teachers work closely with them to meet theri child's needs. (Q1d) Data from 2015-16 Quality Review Measure How effectively does the school partner with families to support student success? (3.4) Score 4.99 Well Developed Our priority area is to increase parental participation at all school events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, family will participate in school wide events that maximize community resources as evidenced by an increase of 10% in attendance. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students and parents Teachers will use telephone, email, or Internet applications; such as Remind 101 to stay in touch with parents in their class. Parents will receive communication from the principal by email, school website and backpack about important events and functions. Monthly letter sharing information, events, curriculum, grants, etc. will be sent home and posted on the website. A monthly calendar will be sent home including all events. Parent coordinator will provide outreach via email blasts and telephone calls to notify parents of school news and events and special happenings around the City. Various times throughout the school year Monthly, weekly or daily based on need All classroom teachers Principal Technology Staff Grade leaders Parent Coordinator PS 212 will have four meetings a year with all staff and parents. All students and parents 9/13/18 All Staff Meeting 1 – Back to School Night Back to School Night: Parents will have the opportunity to meet the classroom teachers in a social and classroom setting. 1  Meetings 2 & 3 – Parent Teacher Conferences; Parents will have the opportunity to meet the teacher to learn about their child’s progress. Meeting 4 – Meet Next Year's Teacher Night Parents will have the opportunity to meet all of the teachers for the following year and learn about the curriculum and expectations. Pre-kindergarten orientation and kindergarten orientation will also take place on this evening. Parents will be provided a tour of the building and will meet with the teachers to learn about the curriculum. Parent workshops: homework habits, study habits, and strengthening family and school relationships. All students and parents 11/16/18 03/15/19 5/23/19 Various times throughout the school year Parent Coordinator CookShop for Families: Students and parents learn about nutrition, and how to prepare healthy food in hands on weekly workshops. Parents are invited to a monthly class to learn about nutrition. Holiday craft workshops Brain Power Education workshop for parents. We partnered with this organization to address specific needs of students in the areas of focus, mindfulness, and emotional wellness. They will provide a workshop to parents that explain their program and how parents can help their children at home. STEM Workshop: Parents will be invited to an evening of science and math where parents and children team up to work on three STEM projects which include science, math, technology and architecture in grades 3 – 5. STEM Workshop: Parents will be invited to an evening of science and math where parents and children team up to work on three STEM projects which include science, math, technology and architecture in grades Pre-K - 2. students and parents March-May 2019 Parent Coordinator Classroom teachers Parent Coordinator All students and parents Various times throughout the school year All students and parents October 2018 Partner: Brain Power Education Teacher Mentors Administration Science Teacher & STEM Teacher All students and parents November 2018 2  Internet Safety and Cyber-bullying presentation. This presentation will provide parents with important tips on how to keep their children safe online. 3-5 January 2019 Technology Teachers Brigherbites a non for profit organization will provide 2 bags fo fruits and vegetables for a family of 4 16 times . 8 in the fall and 8 i;n the spring. All community members Fall and spring 2018-2019 Administration Parent coordinator volunteers Pajama Day: Parents will be invited (in their pajamas) to read with their children while enjoying cookies and milk. All students and parents February 2018 Literacy Coach Welcome to our school breakfast Pre-K and Kindergarten Sept. 5, 2018 Musical Performances: Parents will be invited to two musical performances. Children from grades 2 – 5 will participate and perform in the Winter and Spring Musical along with band members, drummers, kickline dancers, recorder players Art of the Dance - students in grade 4 and 2 will perform Sleeping Beauty and the Nutcracker Students from Grades 2-5 and their Parents All students and parents in grades 2 and 4 Middle School Application Process: Parents of 5 th grade students will be invited to attend a workshop on navigating the middle school process. 5 th grade students and parents Administration PTA Music Teacher Classroom teachers December 2018 & June 2019 December 17, 2018 Residency classroom teachers Guidance Counselor March 2019 November 2018, January 2019, and May 2019 Theater Club Performance & Scenery Club – Parents will be invited to our club performance. Students, as part of our school-wide enrichment model (SEM) will design and perform. Grades 4 & 5 and Parents June 2019 Classroom Teachers Joyce dance - students in grade 3 will participate in a residency culminating in a dance performance Grade 3 January 2019 Classroom Teachers Mother’s Day Tea Schubert Theater - students in ESL and special education classes will create a theater production using puppets Multicultural luncheons will be hosted at all grade levels. and Parents May 2019 Arts Partners Kindergarten and Pre K Teacher Kindergarten and Pre K students & Mothers 3 ELL and special education students and Parents Various times throughout the school year Arts partner: Schubert Theater Administration Parent Coordinator Classroom Teachers All students and parents Various times throughout 3 Rise New York - this organization will donate $100 to each entering kindergarten child to start a college fund. the school year Kindergarten students and parents Throughout the school year New York City School Mental Health will provide workshops for parents on how to parent All Parents September, December 2018 Smile New York - students will receive dental cleaning and the filling of cavities All students November 2018, 2019 as needed Parent Coordinator Payroll secretary Mental health providers Smile NY employees Parent coordinator parent volunteersa 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We currently partner with HANAC. This community based organization provides after school care to 200 of our students. Their program provides homework support, dance, and physical education. This program is open during many school holidays and as a camp during the summer months. They provide performances for parents twice during the school year. Art of the Dance - students in different grades perform two shows a year for their parents. Brighterbites will provide fruits and vegetables 8 times in the fall and 8 times in the spring to all community members. RISE New York will start college funds for all incoming Kindergarteners. Smile New York provides dental care for all of our students. Providing parents this service for their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Using school staff, parent volunteers, grants and partnerships PS 212 will offer our community the services and events listed above. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 4  PS 212 will continuously monitor whether services, grants, partnerships, activities are being provided. This will be monitored from attendance, sign in sheets, materials, participation in events and activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-in sheets and parent communication logs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Running Records Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Teacher's College ELA State Test Running Records Writing samples LLI reading program MoSL Words Their Way RAZ Kids Highlighting Diebels Circling information Students review or preview work being done in the classroom using manipulatives and strategies learned. Fourth grade curriculum Mathematics State Math Scores Science Pre and Post tests from GoMath MoSL Observation of students . Classroom exams and projects. Experiments Knowledge of equipment When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Services are provided throughout the school day. Students receiving a failing score on the ELA test receive services after school. During the regular school day. Lunch After school Regular school day Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) AIS teacher works with the bottom one third of the class in small group of students Small groups of 4 or 5 students work on Fundation and Wilson. RtI providers work with groups of 4 students outside the classroom on LLI. Math Coach works with lowest one third of the grade in small groups. Science teacher works with a group of fourth graders during club period on Fridays. 6 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Outline of materials Highlighted materials Small group instruction with the classroom teacher Regular school day Observation of students. Projects, exams. Rubrics Observation Materials in home language Social groups. The guidance counselor works with children in grades 3 Regular school day OORs reports Beginning ELL groups Parent interviews Counseling sessions 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) None 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide the school supplies and uniforms as needed. School supplies, such as backpacks, notebooks, and looselead paper, will be purchased for the children. We will purchase school We will arrange for transportation to and from school either via Metro Card or bus. We will provide counseling services as needed. As will all of our struggling students we will provide an individualized intervention program in academic areas as needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). None 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  We will provide school supplies. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We do not have students. 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All staff is highly qualified. Many staff members have dual licenses in areas such as ESL and Special Education. Staff members utilize the ESL certification program offered by St. John’s University. Our literacy coach is Nationally Board Certified and provides mentoring services and professional development. Additionally, we also have a Math Coach/Teacher Center Specialist that assists teachers throughout the year in building their practice. Staff members share their expertise and work in teams to provide rigorous, differentiated instruction. Support staff and teachers are encouraged to participate in professional learning offered by the Field Support Center and other NYCDOE affiliates. PS 212Q does not have a high teacher turnover rate. This is due to the fact that administration empowers teachers to have a voice in many of the decisions, such as curriculum and programs, that are used on a daily basis. Furthermore, teachers are encouraged to share new ideas and strategies with others on their grade teams and across the school. Strategies for recruitment: We will only seek to recruit teachers who hold multiple certifications (GE, SWD, ENL, Bilingual, etc.). We anticipate hiring a bilingual teacher for 2018-19. In this way our students benefit from a highly qualified educator who has an understanding of the different types of students in our building, and educational theories and practice. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The professional development committee works to provide high standard, relevant professional development to the staff. The administration researches grants, programs and professional development to enhance teacher’s practices that align with the Common Core Standards. Professional Development: Advanced Literacy, GoMath, Fundations Teacher’s College Writing, Google Drive and Docs, Technology skills, Social Studies, and STEM are a few of the workshops planned for the upcoming school year. Professional development in technology is on going throughout the school year. As we receive new technology, Ipad carts, Promethean Tables, communication apps, we provide professional development on their use in the classroom. The PS 212 staff will participate in staff development in the district-wide initiative to promote Advanced Literacies across all content areas. 0  Each year six members of the staff, both upper and lower grades, participate in the LEAP program. Professional development is provided throughout the school year. On going professional development is provided for all staff members in special education, ESL, technology, literacy and math. Support staff provide workshops on Executive Functioning, speech development, and fine and gross motor. All staff is being trained on Brain Power Wellness and professional development is provided in physical education that can be practiced in the classrooms. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). This is our third year with a pre-kindergarten class at P.S. 212Q. We have added one additional section of pre-kindergarten to our school. Our curriculum is aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. We have adopted the NYCDOE Early Childhood Units of Study, the Explore track, for literacy development. We have partnered with Bank Street in partnership with the Division of Early Childhood to implement Fidelity of Math. The classroom teacher attended workshops this summer for training in the curriculum. In addition to the training, the teacher is supported by the BFSC and a Building Blocks mentor, who works with the teacher once a month for 3 hours in her classroom. The classroom teacher will also attend workshops throughout the year in literacy, math, and the arts. Furthermore, intervisitations have also been setup for the teacher to visit other Pre-K classes in District 30. In addition to the curriculum, the classroom is equipped with a "Family Engagement" bulletin board, providing parents with activities they can do at home to support the learning in the classroom. The teacher has also utilized Class Messenger-a web-based application that allows the teacher and parents to communicate with each other directly. The teacher can send daily photos of activities, updates of what the students are learning and notify of events taking place at the school. Systems are in place to identify children in need of Special Education services. Our school psychologist visits Pre-Ks of incoming Kindergarteners with early intervention services to ensure that we have all the necessary services needed for each child. 1  In late January/early February, the administration attends a community event for parents of incoming Kindergarten children highlighting the local schools. In March, parents are provided a walkthrough of our building. In late May/early June, families that are registered for Kindergarten the following year are invited to an orientation meeting to introduce them to the teachers and take a tour of the school. All incoming Kindergarten children are assessed before they start of school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The MoSL Committee decides on the assessments to be used during the school year. The literacy coach and the math coach train teachers regarding the implementation and scoring of these exams. Teacher teams analyze and share results with the staff to improve and drive instruction. Teacher teams create pacing calendars and adjustments to curriculum based on test results. Teacher-made assessments are based on needs assessment from the ELA, Math and MoSL exams. Exams from Go Math are based on the Common Core and depend on the pre-tests given in each classroom. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 364,241.00 Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 109,313.00 12,012.00 0 3,982,638.00 X X X NA X 5E 5B, 5C 5A 5A, 5C, 5E 2  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 3  representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 212 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 212 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 5  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 6  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 212Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 7  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 8  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 9  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 0  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: For school year 2018-2019 we plan to offer two programs to our English Language Learners: English Language Arts - For school year 2018-19 we are anticipating approximately 105 students in grades 1-5 will participate in the ENL After School Literacy and NYSESLAT Preparation Program. Spanish Language Arts - For school year 2018-19 we are anticipating approximately 100 students in grades K - 3 will participate in an after school program designed to provide Spanish Language Arts enrichment activities to both native Spanish speakers and monolingual English speakers. Based on an analysis of formative assessments and students' NYSESLAT and NYS ELA scores, we have determined that there is a need for targeted supplemental instruction to foster understanding and use of academic language among first through fifth grade English Language Learners. Our goal is to promote students use of written and spoken academic language as well as their listening and speaking skills in an effort to move students towards meeting the grade level expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards.Students will also increase their social skills as they work collaboratively in groups to discuss texts, peer edit, and present their work. ENL methodologies will be implemented to ensure language development at all proficiency levels. All four literacy modalities will be targeted: Listening, speaking, reading, and writing.Number of students by grade: Grade 1 - 22 students Grade 2 - 21 studentsGrade 3- 27 studentsGrade 4- 15 studentsGrade 5- 20 studentsAll first through fifth grade ELLs will be invited to participate in this program. Language of instruction: English Five certified teachers will lead these classes; certified in the following:3 teachers are dually certified in ENL and CB2 teachers are certified in ENL/CB/SWD Beginning October 2018 through May 2019 the program will run on Thursdays and Fridays, afterschool from 2:30pm- 3:30pm, for a total of 26 instructional sessions. Spanish Language Arts - Students will practice Spanish guided reading in small groups with a bilingual teacher. Number of students by grade: Kindergarten - 25 students Grade 1 - 22 students Grade 2 - 21 studentsGrade 3- 32 studentsAll students ELLs and non-ELLs will be invited to participate in this program. Language of instruction: Spanish Beginning October 2018 through June 2019 the program will run on Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Friday after school from 2:30 pm-3:30pm for a total of 23 instructional sessions. Home language support will be provided verbally via same language buddies/peers and or teacher use of the home language to support meaning. Bilingual glossaries and bilingual content related books will also be made available as a resource. 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Students will be invited and notices sent home via backpack. All invitations to the programs will be sent home in parents preferred language of communication. Rosters will be created for attendance purposes, outreach will be conducted to ensure all invited students attend the programs, and all invitations to the program and program descriptions will be sent home in the parents preferred language of communication. Student attendance and rosters will be maintained on file. **A supervisor will be paid with Title III funds as we do not have any additional operational programs. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development will positively impact the progress of our English Language Learners (ELLs) in such that our English as a New Language (ENL) and bilingual teachers will be better prepared to meet their unique needs. Teachers who are well versed in ENL strategies and have a clear understanding of each program will be well suited to teach ELLs and their instructional programs. In order for teachers to deliver lessons with fidelity and to develop a solid repertoire of effective ENL strategies, we will hold professional development prior to the start of each program so that teachers can familiarize themselves with the materials. During this time, teachers will engage in looking at student work, assessment scores, and familiarizing themselves with the New Language Arts Progressions (New York State Bilingual Common Core Initiative) and NYSESLAT Targets of Measurement to plan their lessons and modify to meet the needs of all English Language Learners.Professional Development for the NYSESLAT literacy program will be facilitated by the Assistant Principal and ENL teachers. Topics to be covered include but are not limited to planning of units of study, differentiating instruction based on English language proficiency, and incorporating hands on learning activities to increase the rigor and intellectual student engagement. Title III Program Specific Professional Development: October - One session, one hour in length - Topic: Mathematics and vocabulary for ELLs presented by our UFT Teacher Center Teacher and offered as CTLE hours. January - Two sessions, one hour in length - Topic: Differentiating instruction for ELLs and NYSESLAT preparation. 2018-19: September/October - Three sessions, one hour in length- 8 ENL/Bilingual Teachers - Topic: Differentiating instruction for ELLs and NYSESLAT preparation. September/October - Three sessions, one hour in length - 3 Bilingual Teachers: Topic: Planning to support Spanish as a Second Language. To review new supplemental materials to support Spanish as a Second Language instruction. 4  Part C: Professional Development For each in-school professional development session there will be an attendance sheet and an agenda. Records will be kept on file in the principal's professional learning binder. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Based on data from the RAPL report parents preferred languages are: English 55%, Spanish 36.5%, Bengali 3.7%, and Chinese 1.8%. PS 212 represents diverse families of approximately 13 different languages listed in order from greatest to least: English, Spanish, Bengali, Chinese, Nepali, Urdu, Arabic, Punjabi, Mandarin, Hindi, Kannada, Polish, Russian, and Tibetan. Our needs analysis indicates the importance of providing our parents with basic parenting skills, access to community resources, and how to help their children at home both academically and socially. We offer many outreach programs to parents each month. Events are generally well attended as the focus is on parenting, academics, healthy and nutrition, as well as arts and crafts: -School Sponsored and run by our Parent Coordinator: CookShop for Families (Tuesdays), Cornell Nutrition Workshops (Fridays), Beautiful Me for Mothers (Wednesdays), and a host of other parent topics such relating to: health, art, reading, and self-advocacy. -Additionally, we conduct outreach for parent volunteers to assist with school events. For example, our annual Pumpkin Patch on October 30, 2018. We will have 1,000 pumpkins delivered and parents are needed to unload the truck and set up the pumpkin patch. Parents are then able to stay and watch their child participate in this exciting event. -This year we have been awarded a grant from Brighter Bites which is an organization who provides fresh fruit and vegetables for a family of four for a week. This will occur on 16 Wednesdays during the school year. Translation services are provided by the company and our school staff to explain the registration process and to navigate how to pick up their groceries, as well as volunteer opportunities. -This is our second year partnering with RISE NY for our kindergarten and first grade students and their families to begin to save for college. There will be several events throughout the school year hosted by our parent coordinator and the organization. The first workshop will be on Monday, September 17th at 4:30 pm. -PTA Sponsored: PTA Meetings, Fitness Tuesdays, Friday Movie Night and other family events. Our goal moving forward is to offer parent workshops that focus on strategies and activities they can do at home with their children to help them succeed academically. We will host a series of workshops that target the specific learning needs of our English Language Learners: - Homework Habits (Grades K-5). Two sessions, one hour each. -Healthy Eating and Nutrition Program. Six sessions, one hour each. -Beautiful Me for Mothers. Six sessions, one hour each. -Go Math! What is the program and how can I help my child complete their homework? Three sessions: Grades K-1, 2-3, and 4-5, one hour each. -Cookshop for Families - Eight sessions, one hour each. 5  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities -Word games and strategies for emergent readers. (Grades K-1). One session, one hour. -Middle School Application Process. One session, one hour. -Technology and Cyber Safety. One session, one hour. Workshops will be presented by certified ENL teachers, the parent coordinator, outside organizations, bilingual guidance counselor, and administrators. Workshops will be offered in the morning and evening. We have also partnered with School Mental Health to provide parent workshops: September 17, 2018 from 6:00- 6:30 PM and 6:30 - 7:00 PM 1.) Parent workshop- Parenting Skills and Positive Discipline. Flourishing Students Need Positive Parents presented by Western Queens. 2.) Parent workshop- Building responsibility in Children. December 18, 2018 at 8:15 AM 1.) Parent workshop- "Introduction to Child Development" presented by School Mental Health (Parabjit). Translation services will be offered to all parents through school aides, Parent Coordinator and Paraprofessionals that are paid per session using the translations and interpretation budget allocation. We also utilize the Translation Services Unit, if we cannot satisfy the language needs of the parents/ community. Additionally, we will use translation applications via Internet and iPads. For each parent workshop there will be an attendance sheet. Records will be kept on file in the principal's parent engagement binder. Invitations will be sent in parents' preferred language of communication. Parents in our school community generally prefer email and or phone messaging. We are utilizing a program entitled REMIND this year which translates all messages into 70 of the most prevalent languages in NYC. This program helps us to communicate with our parents in their preferred language of communication. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must accou6  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount nt for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality s7  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount taff and curriculum development contracts. 8  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount 9  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount 0  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount 1  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount 2  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount 3  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount 4  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount 5  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount 6  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount 7  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount 8  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount 9  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additiona0  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount l curricula, instructional materials.  Must 1  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2  3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name PS 212 Borough Queens School Number 212 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Carin Ellis Coach Danielle Mahoney ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Maria Bermudez Teacher/Subject Area Karla LorenzanaBilingual Teach Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Dr. Composto Assistant Principal Laura Miniero Coach Debbie Levy School Counselor Monica Recalde Parent Ibette Reyes Parent Coordinator Olga Flores Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 14 0 5 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 12 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 1 D. Student Demographics 4  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 787 Total number of ELLs 122 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.50% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 2015-16 2016-17 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 1 1 0 2 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In grades K-5, we use the Teacher's College Reading and Writing assessments to find the reading levels of the students as well as insight into their concepts of print. In grades K and 1, we use the Dynamic Indicators of Basic Early Literacy Skills (DIBELS) to measure phonemic awareness, phonological awareness, blending and segmenting of sounds, nonsense words, and reading comprehension. In our K, 1, and 2 dual language program we use the Fountas and Pinnell Sistema de Evaluacion de la Lectura. The data gives us an idea of the literacy levels of our ELLs in English and their home language. It shows us their knowledge of print, identification of individual letters and sounds, sight words, spelling capabilities and use of reading strategies. The students’ reading level is assessed as well as their literal and inferential comprehension skills. Insight is also gained into our ELLs’ speaking skills as they retell the stories they've read. This gives the classroom and ENL teacher the information needed to guide instruction and create individual benchmarks. These benchmarks may not be “on 5  grade level” but are adjusted to meet the needs of the students who are acquiring the English language. Assessments measure students' skill levels and determine next steps for instruction. Students’ reading levels are assessed on a bi-monthly basis. We also have noticed that children who are ELLs-SWD, require instruction that is scaffolded in ways that support both exceptionalities. Instructional planning is driven by data that is collected on each student from formative and curriculum-embedded assessments, for example: small group instruction, individualized instruction, and whole class. Students are grouped by reading level to facilitate comprehension of texts, and students are grouped by skill level in phonics to facilitate the development of that skill. Students are grouped by speaking proficiency in a variety of ways, for example entering students may be grouped for a lesson to work on basic speaking skills; yet they may also be heterogeneously grouped by proficiency level to promote class discussions. Students are grouped in all subject areas based on data, (e.g., reading level, English proficiency level, mathematics proficiency level), all to ensure student accessibility to content. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have scheduled assessment periods throughout the school year. Administration and teachers analyze all student data for trends and to identify students who require additional supports. Teachers have common planning time to review results. We also have an AIS/PPT Team in place to evaluate results for students who may require Response to Intervention (RtI). We have provided time for ENL teachers to meet on Monday and Tuesday afternoons, as well as two or more common planning periods per week for instructional planning and planning of experiential learning opportunities. Administration meets with teachers to review student data and set instructional priorities. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our benchmark and summative assessments include: DIBELS for grades K and 1 - Dynamic Indicators of Basic Early Literacy Skills (DIBELS) to measure phonemic awareness, phonological awareness, blending and segmenting of sounds, nonsense words, and reading comprehension. Fountas and Pinnell Sistema de Evaluacion de la Lectura for our Dual Language grades K and 1, and for 2017-18 grade 2. Measures reading level in Spanish. Teachers College Running Records for grades K to 5. Measures reading level in English; fluency, comprehension, and phonic miscues. Go Math in English for grades K to 5. Measures all math skills as aligned by New York State Common Core Learning Standards for mathematics. Go Math in Spanish for grades K, 1, and 2 for 2017-18 and for newcomer ELLs in grades 1 to 5. Measures all math skills as aligned by New York State Common Core Learning Standards for mathematics. Teachers College Writing Project Rubrics for grades K to 5. Measures students writing skills in narrative writing, informational writing, and opinion writing across a continuum of skills: overall, lead, transitions, ending, organization, elaboration, craft, spelling, and punctuation. NYC DOE core curriculum for Social Studies assessments. Measures scope and sequence thinking and process skills: thinking skills, research and writing skills, interpersonal and group relations, sequencing and chronology skills, map and globe skills, and graph and image analysis skills. *New for 2018-19 Amplify science curriculum and assessments in English and Spanish. Teacher created assessments for grades K to 5 in all subject areas: ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science. Measures skills aligned to New York State Common Core Learning Standards. Additional rubrics are utilized to determine each student's progress in: reading responses (oral and written), written response jots, and oral presentations. All assessments also align to New York State Bilingual Common Core Initiative New Language Arts Progressions and Home Language Arts Progressions. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 6  If Tier 2 or 3 interventions may be required, the student is referred to our AIS/PPT team for further study. Students are provided with an intervention for six weeks, then administered a post test, based on the results of the post test we either change the intervention or end the intervention. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At PS 212, we use data to guide instruction and support the academic achievement of ELLs by looking at each child's academic history and patterns found in English language proficiency (based on standardized test scores and informal observations and assessments). By analyzing this data, we are able to determine whether a student has an issue with processing information or is still becoming proficient in the English language. The teachers use ongoing student assessments and tiered instruction for struggling students. ENL services are considered a Tier 1 service. Tier 2 is extra exposure to instruction, focused on students' needs. Tier 3 instruction is intensive intervention which consists of one-on-one tutoring or additional special services. If these students do not make progress in Tier 3, they are referred for special education services. We have found that the best practices in literacy assessment are using a variety of data sources to design tailored instruction, facilitate student learning, and monitor progress. We use the data from these assessments to identify students for Tier 2 interventions. The data from formative assessments is used to monitor progress and RTI instruction. It is used frequently, and is guided by instruction based on the curriculum. This is largely driven by teacher observation, although assessments can be formal as well as informal. An example of this would be Fountas and Pinnell running records, quizzes, and check-ins. In addition to this information, if more than 20% of students in a given class are struggling with the same skill, RTI is not needed because the students' problem is not unusual given the performance of their peers. This means that the teacher should revisit the skill or topic and should focus on the instructional core, following up with class-wide measures at least every 6 weeks. If the student's need is unusual given peers' performance, then the teacher should provide targeted intervention in the specific skills and follow up with formative assessments every 3-6 weeks. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We incorporate data from all assessments into our ELL program. Teachers are provided with each student's English proficiency level as well as their modality scores on the NYSESLAT. Teachers are also provided with each student's (if applicable) ELA, Math, and Science state test score or it is noted if the student is exempt from taking the ELA or from taking the ELA the previous year based on when the student entered the country. NYSESLAT Data from spring 2017 shows the following: Entering - 5 students Emerging - 5 students Transitioning - 26 students Expanding - 49 students Commanding - 16 students The data reveals that general education students who are ELLs tend to acquire speaking and listening skills at a much quicker pace than they acquire skills in reading and writing (regardless of age and home language proficiency). As they are immersed in using English to communicate in all four modalities, our ELLs make steady progress in all areas. Our SWD's who are also ELLs seem to acquire speaking and listening skills at a rate that is fairly consistent with the GE population; however, if they don’t make progress in reading and writing by grade 2, there is a reduced likelihood that they will be able to score at the proficient level on the NYSESLAT. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data provided from the ELL Data Analysis Tool help us to break down the data by students' proficiency levels within each NYSESLAT testing modality. We are also able to identify students at-risk by sorting data to account for risk factors such as: regressing a proficiency level, remaining at the same proficiency level, attendance, evidence of a disability, and other state assessment scores. This data is analyzed and reported to the classroom teachers and service providers via a printed report that contains English proficiency level and modality scores. Planning and programming needs are discussed at the instructional cabinet meetings and ENL team meetings. An instructional plan is created for each student to help them access the curriculum based on their specific needs. 7  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We offer a Freestanding ENL program model. Our students are heterogeneously grouped by proficiency level in one class. Currently we have one ENL class in each grade, kindergarten through grade 5. Teachers plan instruction to reach all students based upon their English proficiency levels. In our freestanding ENL classrooms all the teachers are: TESOL and Common Branch (K ‐ 6) certified or TESOL, Common Branch (K-6), and Special Education certified. Students who score at the Entering or Emerging English proficiency level receive 2 units of student per week (360 minutes): 1 unit in Stand-Alone ENL instruction and 1 unit of Integrated ENL. Students who score at the Transitioning level receive 1/2 unit of instruction Stand-Alone and or 1/2 or 1 unit of Integrated ENL. Students who score at the Expanding level receive 1 unit of Integrated ENL. Students who score at the Commanding level receive .5 unit of Integrated ENL. Stand-alone ENL is instruction to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. A student may not receive stand-alone ENL in lieu of core content area instruction. Integrated ENL is instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction. It is delivered by a dually certified teacher (ENL and a content area or common branch) or co-teaching by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies). Both methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status must receive a .5 unit of integrated ENL in a content area. PS 212 offers the following models: -Push-in model: an ENL teacher works with ELLs in collaboration with general education classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. There is a common preparation time between the 2 teachers and/or prior collaborative lesson planning. -Pull-out model: ELLs who spend the majority of their day in all-English content instruction are brought together from various classes for English-acquisition-focused instruction. ENL teachers plan carefully with general education teachers to ensure curricular alignment and continuity of instruction. -Self-contained model: ELLs are grouped together in an ENL class, usually for the entire school day and for all content instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Our school has a self-contained 50-50 partial immersion model/Two-Way Dual Language Program in Spanish. Students are taught in English and the target language (Spanish) using the alternating-day model. Classes are comprised of 50-60% monolingual English speaking students and 40-50% of monolingual Spanish speaking students/English Language Learners. In our kindergarten class one teacher is responsible for the home language (Spanish or English) and the target language (Spanish or English). The class is comprised of English proficient students and English Language Learners 8  (Spanish is the home language). The classroom teacher is a common branch teacher K-6 with a bilingual extension. In our first and second grade classes we have two teachers; one teacher is certified as a common branch teacher K-6 and one teacher is a common branch teacher with the bilingual extension K-6. The classes are comprised of English proficient students and English Language Learners (Spanish is the home language). The classroom teacher is a common branch teacher K-6 with a bilingual extension. Our primary language acquisition goals are the development of grade-level-appropriate bilingual and biliterate academic skills in both English and the target language for all students. We are committed to providing a rigorous instructional environment with will provide all of our dual language students to be able to develop into fully bilingual students by the end of grade five in all literacy modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Our Dual Language Program includes: An ENL component designed to develop skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in EnglishAll content-area courses/subjects are taught in the home language and EnglishA home language arts component designed to develop skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in the students’ home language while cultivating an appreciation of their history and culture 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? At PS 212, our program is designed as a Freestanding ENL program. All students are served according to the New York State mandate as required under CR Part 154.2 Entering and Emerging students receive 360 minutes per week of instruction in both stand-alone ENL and integrated ENL services. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes of instruction per week through integrated ENL services. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction through integrated ENL services for two years after passing the NYSESLAT or for students in grades three to five after passing the ELA with a level 3 score or higher and scoring the NYSESLAT at the Expanding level. All English Language Learners receive integrated ENL instruction which includes content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status receive at least the minimum number of units of integrated ENL. The assistant principals program all students to ensure that the mandated instructional time is provided in each model, with their required time, and follows all mandated guidelines. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Freestanding ENL all content is delivered via Standalone ENL and Integrated ENL. Dual Language all content is delivered in the target language (Spanish) and English. All classes are taught in English using a balanced literacy approach incorporating the New York State Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and the Bilingual Common Core Initiative New Language Arts and Home Language Arts Progressions. Cluster teachers confer with classroom teachers and ENL teachers regularly and align the curriculum to ENL strategies to scaffold classroom instruction. Core content is delivered via a dually certified teacher or a bilingual teacher. Content area curriculum which is presented by classroom and cluster teachers provides a variety of instructional strategies and scaffolding of concepts in the ENL program. Concepts are introduced using ENL strategies to ensure multiple access points and make content comprehensible: home language support (bilingual dictionaries & glossaries, cognates, translated versions of materials, access to translation app on iPad or website), visuals, sentence stems, discussion protocols, manipulatives, non-9  verbal cues/gestures, activating background knowledge, pre-teaching essential vocabulary, use of graphic organizers, and utilizing a multi-modal/multi-sensory approach. The material becomes comprehensible to our ELLs without watering down the content. Content area vocabulary is a strong focus. These strategies make core curriculum accessible to our ELLs. Resources from the Common Core library are utilized to support the academic progress of our ELLs. Materials used in Literacy and Mathematics: Reading Streets (English and Spanish), Fundations, Leveled Literacy Intervention, and Words Their Way (English), and Go Math (English and Spanish). 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We have a large number of staff members who are proficient in other languages (Spanish, Punjabi, Hindi, Bengali). We utilize these professionals to assist us with translation services. In the event that a student arrives and we do not have the personnel to help, we immediately call the translation unit for assistance. Students in our kindergarten dual language program are assessed via chapter and unit assessments in ELA and Mathematics in Reading Streets and Go Math (English and Spanish versions). Additionally, new kindergarten dual language Spanish speaking students are administered the Spanish LAB at enrollment which assesses a student's oral comprehension and speaking. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status At PS 212, we differentiate instruction for all students in our school. When considering differentiation for our English Language Learners (ELLs) we factor in the students’ English proficiency levels, educational backgrounds in content knowledge, and their home language literacy skills. We also consider the student's readiness level, interest in the topic, and their learning preferences. Our teachers get to know as much as possible about each student, have high expectations for all students, are familiar with a wide variety of research-based instructional strategies, use ongoing assessment to guide instruction, provide multiple types of assessment, and collaborate with our entire team to plan for all students. All lessons are differentiated in all subject areas according to the needs or our students. Using the framework, Universal Design for Learning, our teachers recognize that every student learns differently. All new material is presented using texts, charts, and technology. Concepts are introduced using ENL strategies to achieve full understanding. Home language picture dictionaries and glossaries are used to help ELLs make connections to English and help ease stress. Technology is integrated into lessons which allows the use of pictures and videos to ensure understanding. Flexible grouping is used in each period for students to act as peer models and to work with peer models. SIFE - Although we do not have SIFE students presently enrolled at PS 212, we will use the data gathered from the LENS and our formative assessments to help close their academic gap by providing explicit small group instruction, targeted to their needs. Newcomer - The majority of students in this subgroup at PS 212 fall into this category. Instruction is differentiated on a daily basis for all students in our school. Formative and summative assessment data is consistently reviewed and instruction is designed to meet the needs of our students. Students are grouped for small group instruction. We have teachers with multiple certifications who take a newcomers group two to three periods per week for additional small group instruction. Developing - We have a very small population, 9 students, who fall into this ELL subgroup. These students receive Response to Intervention and most receive special education services. These students are closely followed and interventions are targeted to their specific needs. Long Term - We do not have students that fall into this ELL subgroup. For any student enrolled at PS 212, their needs are assessed and explicit instruction is designed to help to close their achievement gap. Former ELLs - All students in this subgroup receive ENL instruction in a content area at least 90 minutes per week and receive testing accommodations on all New York State assessments. 0  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? For the most part, students with disabilities and ELLs are exposed to the same curriculum and materials as all other students. We use Pearson's Reading Street in the early grades and Ready Gen in the upper grades as the basis of our literacy instruction and Go Math for math instruction. ELLS-SWD receive supportive instruction via Fundations, Wilson, LLI, and Jr. Great Books programs when appropriate. Students are put into flexible groups based on abilities, preferred learning styles, modalities of instruction, etc. and instructed in ways that help them to compensate for their disabilities. The use of technology devices (ex: pencil grips, laptops, special chairs, etc.) also help SWD-ELLs as do testing modifications and accommodations. For academic content and language acquisition, concepts are introduced using ENL strategies to ensure multiple access points and make content comprehensible: home language support (bilingual dictionaries & glossaries, cognates, translated versions of materials, access to translation app on iPad or website), visuals, sentence stems, discussion protocols, manipulatives, non-verbal cues/gestures, activating background knowledge, pre-teaching essential vocabulary, use of graphic organizers, flexible grouping and small group work, and utilizing a multi-modal/multi-sensory approach. All ELLs, including those with disabilities, are programmed for ENL for the mandated number of units of ENL as per CR Part 154. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs are placed in a classroom setting based on their IEP: self-contained (SC), integrated co-teaching (ICT), or general education (GE). All special education teachers are provided with time to meet with each student to work on their IEP goals or to integrate their IEP goals with their language acquisition goals. We use flexible scheduling for our ELL-SWDs to meet mandated number of minutes and to help our students access the curriculum. For example, ELL-SWDs are often mainstreamed into other classrooms for subjects that they find challenging or for classes in which they excel. In addition, students may receive ENL push-in or pull-out services during the day to support their language acquisition. All teachers have been trained in special education strategies to help students with learning disabilities. Classrooms are equipped with, Promethean Boards, mini labs and IPads. Teachers have also received training that parallels the strategies used for SWD and ELLs. This training has allowed them to create lessons for all of their students that are appropriate and engaging within the Least Restrictive Environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Based on each student's need, interventions could be 1:1 or a small group setting and range from two to five additional 40-minute periods per week. All ELL subgroups (newcomer, developing, long term, sife, former ELLs) are targeted based upon student needs. For example if a student in Commanding yet requires an intervention in mathematics, they will receive the targeted intervention. Our targeted interventions are ELA (Fundations or Wilson for phonics, Leveled Literacy for reading comprehension and fluency, RAZ Kids for reading comprehension, ABC Mouse for phonics) and Math (Go Math RtI intervention for mathematics and ST Math computer based math program). All of our ELLs are provided the same opportunities as all students in the school. Our ELL students continue to receive interventions noted above even if they reach English proficiency. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For 2017-18 we purchased the iReady program. This program is a single K–12 adaptive Diagnostic for reading and mathematics that pinpoints student needs down to the sub-skill level, and ongoing progress monitoring shows whether students are on 1  track to achieve end-of-year targets. We received a grant from the Division of Family and Community Engagement for $15,000; which specifically targets the needs of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. We are partnering with Learning Through Expanded Arts Partnership (LEAP) to implement their Active Learning Leads to Literacy (ALLL) program with four classes in 2nd and 3rd grades, which contain large numbers of ELLs and SWDs. This multidisciplinary arts integration program consists of 30 in-class visits (twice per week), one planning session, one professional development workshop, one family engagement workshop, and one guest artist visit. We have identified the need to increase supports for our students with disabilities and English Language Learners, and plan to specifically target students’ arts, literacy, and social emotional skills. Using a multidisciplinary arts-based approach, ALLL addresses these needs by providing many entry points to learning to students of diverse learning styles. Through multidisciplinary instruction, we will improve students’ arts skills in the four primary disciplines. By integrating arts-based instructional strategies into literacy learning, we also seek to improve students’ ELA outcomes. Additionally, ALLL’s methods are designed to improve students’ social emotional skills. These improvements are beneficial for all students, but are especially crucial for ELLs and SWDs, given the strong body of evidence linking high-quality arts-integrated instruction with improved outcomes in these learning areas. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students fully participate in all school programs and activities offered throughout the year. All ELL students are fully integrated into all school activities. All ELL students in grades 1-5 are eligible to attend our after school ENL program. A few of our ELL students attend our after-school program run by the HANAC organization. Camp is offered during the summer to all students hosted by HANAC for free. All ELL students and their families are invited to attend all family workshops held throughout the year; including all PTA events. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In every class we cater to all learning styles by providing visual, kinesthetic, and tactile activities to support English Language Learners. Technology: We have Promethean Boards in all classrooms. Each classroom has a mini computer lab with laptops. In the early grades we have an Ipad cart (a full class set) for students to access applications such as ABC Mouse, RAZ Kids, ST Math, Building Blocks Mathematics. ST Math - is an online mathematics program that is visual based and supports the mathematics core curriculum. HeadSprouts and ABC Mouse - is our online literacy program for phonics and phonemic awareness. RAZ-Kids - is our online literacy program for reading comprehension. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Dual Language - A second certified bilingual teacher pushes in for one period per day to provide ENL and SSL support. Students receive 50% of instruction in the home language (Spanish) and 50% in English. Students are assessed in reading (Spanish) using the SEL - Sistema de evaluación de la lectura - Fountas and Pinnell. Students are assessed in mathematics (Spanish) using the Go Math program. Students are assessed in other areas of literacy (Speaking and Listening) using teacher made rubrics. Students are also assessed in Spanish by taking the NYC DOE Performance Assessment: Home Language Arts (HLA) assessment twice a year in October and in May. Results of this program provide information in second language acquisition and Spanish language proficiency. ENL - Students receive instruction in English and and home language support they may require to make all content comprehensible. In each program model we provide home language support through the use of multi-language literature, language paraprofessionals, bilingual glossaries, cognates and vocabulary development, staff translation and the use of technology in 2  translation apps on the iPad and through Google translate. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All students are programmed for services in STARS. Required services support and correspond to ELLs' grade levels and English proficiency levels by using appropriate grade and instructional level materials and by following the mandated time according to the CR part 154.2. All instruction is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (Reading Streets K-2, Ready Gen 3-5, Fundations K-2, Go Math K-5. All of our classroom, content area, ENL teachers, AIS interventionists, and related services are certified to work with students in grades Birth - 2 nd grade, 1 st grade - 6 th grade, or K - 12 grade; and assigned appropriately. According to CR 154.2 The maximum allowable grade span for grouping instruction in grades K-12 English as a new language or bilingual education classes is two contiguous grades, except for English language learners in a special class, as defined by section 200.1(uu) of this Title. All programs must be provided during the school day 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs and their families are invited to attend a Kindergarten Orientation where they hear all about our school and are given a tour of the building. Older students also receive a tour of the school at the time of their registration. The Parent Coordinator gives parents information about the school, neighborhood and free adult ESL classes at our school. A Title 1 paraprofessional meets with all newcomers to give them small group instruction while learning the language. The guidance counselor provides a newcomers group to help the children adjust to our school and country. We have a certified ENL teacher meet with all newcomers three times per week and provide instruction in literacy and social skills. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a- Self contained 50/50 split of instruction (roller coaster model) - English and Spanish alternate each day. b- Reading, Mathematics, Social Studies, and Science: English and Spanish c.-Language is alternated every other day. d- Emergent literacy is taught simultaneously - Both languages are taught at the same time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 3  All ENL teachers attend workshops provided by the Field Support Center, DOE and private agencies during the course of the school year. Teachers turnkey all information learned at these meetings to ENL staff. In addition, all support staff and related service providers participate in our ENL turnkey trainings. ENL teachers have received and continue to attend professional learning opportunities at the Queens North Borough Field Support Center, as well as DELLSS city wide workshops, trainings at the UFT, and at universities that address the New York State Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), methods of instruction, effective strategies in working with ELLs, etc. We have visited other model sites to observe how bilingual teachers run their dual language classrooms. They have returned to school to turnkey this information to other classroom teachers. Additionally, all teachers have been trained by staff developers on how to use the Junior Great Books program to assist ELLs with language development. These professional development opportunities support teachers in delivering CCLS aligned instruction as the activities learned are specifically aligned to the bilingual common core initiative and Common Core Learning Standards. To meet the needs of our bilingual/dual language classroom, two teachers will attend a series: Collaborating to Share Best Practices in Bilingual/Dual Language Classrooms to engage in action research and visit model sites. To meet the needs of teachers new to working with ELLs, they will attend a New Teacher Support Institute for Teachers of ELLs. Our ENL teachers in grades 2 through 5 are participating in a Teachers' College professional development series in the teaching of writing via the writing workshop model; effective strategies in working with ELLs will be addressed. Additionally, staff will also attend training at to our District's field support center in Scaffolding Writing for ELLs (K-5). For the summer 2018, we are recommending our bilingual staff to attend the Developing Academic Language and Literacy Skills in the Spanish Bilingual Classroom workshop and Introduction to Advanced Literacy for ELLs – Key Shift 1: Strengthening the Instructional Core (Grades K-5) workshop provided by Queens North Field Support Center. We will also offer continuing education credit coursework to all staff via the UFT Teacher Center Trainer, who is also a staff member. Our ENL team meets monthly to share best practices and/or learn from a colleague about recent trainings they have attended. Non-pedagogic staff such as the Parent Coordinator and Pupil Accounting Secretary attend district and citywide trainings on the topics of improving parent communication and identifying English Language Learners. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. At PS 212, we engage in Professional Learning Communities that look at students work and keep track of data, patterns, and trends so that planning can be done around the students' areas of difficulty. In order to check to make sure that the proper/required percentage of time is spent conducting these types of professional learning, we have a file of agendas and attendance sheets that are monitored. Teachers also keep a log of all of their professional development each year from July to June. The assistant principal is also our ELL Liaison and will attend District 30 meetings topics covered will be shared with staff at monthly meetings. Topics to be covered are: compliance with all government regulations, NYCDOE reporting tools, and researched-based topics on ELL pedagogy. ENL teachers meet monthly to review the requirements of CR Part 154 and effective strategies in working with ELLs. All teachers and level three teaching assistants are provided with the Continuing Teacher and Leader Education (CTLE) Individual record to track their progress. Teachers and level three teaching assistants require 15 hours or 50 hours over five years in ELL specific professional development. Our focus is teaching Mathematics for ELLS this will be provided by one of our staff members, who is also certified by the UFT Teacher Center to award CTLE hours. This will be offered 2 1/2 hours per week for all staff. 4  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Schools must individually meet with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting should include school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English and in the child’s home language in the case of students enrolled in a bilingual education program. Such meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. We will be inviting parents during Tuesday Parent Engagement time, the parents of our ELLs will be invited in for an individual conference to discuss their child's progress, needs and goals. Parents will be provided with their child's NYSESLAT Score Report which provides information about their child's English proficiency in each modality and an overall total English proficiency level. At these meetings, the parents will have an opportunity to express their needs and wants and to make sure we take every step to accommodate these needs. Attendance and minutes will be recorded at these conferences. Translation services will be provided if necessary via phone from the Translation and Interpretation Unit or in person with a qualified interpreter. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are scheduled to attend Parent Teacher Conferences as well as encouraged to participate in all classroom activities, such as, writing and reading celebrations throughout the year. Pajama Day is attended by most parents in the lower grades, as well as, Mother's Day Tea, Cyber Safety, and Family Fitness Nights. Also, every grade hosts a multicultural celebration during which parents are invited to come in and share some items from their culture. All ELL parents are encouraged to participate in all parent workshops throughout the year; such as: Nutrition workshops, Cookshop for Families, Beautiful Me, Homework Without Tears, Responsible Parenting, etc. We use the Parent Coordinator's email distribution system to make sure that parents have up to date information on district and citywide learning opportunities. Monthly letters from the principal highlight student learning and special activities. A school website is available to all parents that is broken down by grade and classes in all languages. Any information sent home is translated into the parents home language. Teachers use "Class Messenger" as a means of communication. Every new family receives a PS 212 Parent Handbook that has been translated into all the languages spoken at our school. New for 2018-19 we received a grant from a program entitled: Brighter Bites. This program relies heavily on parent participation and workshops. This program will provide free fruits and vegetables to our families for 16 weeks during the school year. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. P.S. 212 is a community school with a diverse student population; 18 languages are spoken at our school. We value our students' unique cultures and pride ourselves on providing an educational program that addresses all students' academic and social-emotional needs. We carefully select family engagement activities that reach across all cultures and promote cross-cultural awareness. Our motto is: "We inspire children to learn, to experience, and to achieve.", this is demonstrated on a daily basis in our school. 5  6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Carin Ilene Ellis, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 212Q School DBN: 30Q212 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Carin Ellis Title Principal Laura Miniero Assistant Principal Olga Flores Parent Coordinator Maria Bermudez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ibette Reyes Parent Karla Lorenzana Teacher/Subject Area Danielle Mahoney Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/18/18 6/18/18 6/18/18 6/18/18 6/18/18 6/18/18 6/18/18 6/17 6/17 6/17 6/17 6/17 16/17 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q212 School Name: PS 212 Superintendent: P. Composto The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Olga Flores Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At enrollment, our Assistant Principal or Parent Coordinator meets with parents to find out the child's home language. The Assistant Principal also reviews the following ATS report RAPL to determine written translation and oral interpretation needs. Based on the home language information for each child, school notices are sent home in various languages; primarily in English and Spanish. We survey parents at PTA meetings, teacher classroom surveys, and via Parent Coordinator outreach. We obtain information from the HLIS (parent interview and Part 1 and Part 3),Pre-Kindergarten Language Needs Survey, ATS reports (RAPL - Adult Preferred Language Report), and Blue Emergency Cards. We compile this information into a report for each classroom teacher by class and by grade. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 9  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Bengali Chinese Urdu Arabic Punjabi Tibetan Polish Kannada 411 277 30 14 9 4 1 2 1 1 55 37 4 .018 .012 .005 .002 .002 .0013 .0013 411 277 30 14 9 4 1 2 1 1 55 37 4 .018 .012 .005 .002 .002 .0013 .0013 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Month/Frequency How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of Name Distributed to Families Parent Handbooks - translated documents to parents. Principal's Parent Letter and monthly calendar of school events June and September Handbooks are sent out to a translation company in April. Principal and school aide translates into Spanish 1st of each month All important notices are posted on our website. This site can be accessed in all languages. We have a school aide who translates all school letters into Spanish each month. 00  We also access this site for translated documents: https://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/TranslatedDocs/Templates/default.htm Parent-Teacher Conference announcements September, November, March, and May Ongoing parent events Monthly depending upon event Report Cards November, March, and June Notices printed from parent coordinator's page: http://schools.nyc.gov/Employees/ParentCoordinators/ptconferences.htm Organizations with whom we partner provide translated documentation. For each event we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit at least two weeks in advance. Most documents are readily available on and found at the Translation and Interpretation Unit's website. Sent home in English and we print translated copies from: http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/StudentRecords/ReportCards/default.htm March, April, May, and June We provide parent guides from NYSED explaining the assessment in multiple languages from: http://www.p12.nysed.gov/assessment/ei/parent-resources-17.html New York State Assessment dates and information 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Back to School Night - September Town Hall Safety Meeting Title One Meeting September October ELA and Math NYS Assessment Mandatory Informing Meeting Open School Week October Parent-Teacher Conferences Meet Next Year's Teacher Kindergarten Orientation Parent engagement teacher meetings - Weekly on Tuesdays November and March interpretation service(s)? We have bilingual staff who speak the following languages: English, Spanish, Bengali, Urdu, Punjabi, Arabic, Mandarin 01  Parent engagement via telephone and mobile phone applications May April, May, June Tuesdays: September - June Daily: September - June Daily Attendance monitoring telephone calls Daily/weekly IEP Meetings Weekly: September - June PTA Meetings Monthly: September - June We subscribe to a communication texting program that translates into our three main languages: English, Spanish, and Benagli. We have bilingual staff who speak the following languages: English, Spanish, Bengali, Urdu, and Punjabi. We have bilingual staff who speak the following languages: English, Spanish, Bengali, Urdu, and Punjabi. We have bilingual staff who speak the following languages: English, Spanish, Bengali, Urdu, and Punjabi. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, parents will be contacted via their preferred language as noted on the child's emergency blue card. Messages will be posted to our website. Staff will call parents in their preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff will be trained at the opening of school on Chancellor's Regulation A-663. Resources will be provided such as iSpeak Card and Language and Translation Unit telephone number, as well as a list of staff and the language that they speak. 02  Parent Coordinator will provide a staff training on translation and interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At PS 212, we adhere to all regulations regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services. We determine parents' preferred language, maintain records, and inform staff. All parent notices that are sent home are either sent in the parents primary language or stamped *Important - Please translate* written in many other languages. Parents are also notified of translation services through signs that are displayed throughout the building. The parent coordinator assists any parents to get the required translation services. As stated before, we have many teachers, paraprofessionals, and school aides who also are available to translate any verbal or written communication. Parents who primarily speak a covered language and who require language assistance receive a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities. Staff have printed sheets which list the languages available for interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents will be asked through a survey to rate the quality and availability of services. This will also be a topic discussed during SLT and PTA meetings. We will make adjustments as needed based on parental feedback. 03 
