 26Q216 School Name: J.H.S. 216 GEORGE J. RYAN Principal: REGINALD LANDEAU   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 26Q216 MS 216Q 26Q216 6, 7, 8 64-20 175 th Street Fresh Meadows, NY 11365 (718) 358-2005 (718) 358-2070 Phone Number: Fax: Dr. Reginald Landeau Jr. rlandea@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Dr. Reginald Landeau Jr. Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Nicole Session Avian Davis O’NeikaNewman N/A N/A Alan Stark District Information Geographical District: 26 Danielle Giunta Superintendent: 61-15 Oceania Street, Room 129 Superintendent’s Office Address: Queens, NY 11366 Dgiunta4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-631-6943 Phone Number: 718-631-6996 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens North LawrencePendergast FSC: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Dr. Reginald Landeau Jr. Nicole Session Avian Davis O’Neika Riley Susan Harts Adrianna Malafronte Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name AjithSatyanarayana ShaminaAhmed ManjitKaur Alan Ong Tatiana Soto Angela Russo Signature (Blue Ink) Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ Asst. Principal Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? George J. Ryan Middle School prides itself in addressing the unique educational and social needs of the early adolescent. Our theme is “building community with a student focus”.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. George J. Ryan Middle School has three themed academies: The Academy of Law and Justice, the Academy of Media Arts, and the Academy of Scientific Exploration. At George Ryan Middle School, we have a diverse community focusing on a student-centered environment, promoting mutual respect for all and maximizing students’ potential for high school readiness. We prepare all learners with a differentiated curriculum that is relevant, meaningful and actively engages students in our commitment to high standards. All stakeholders are dedicated to promoting a positive atmosphere where our students’ unique talents are developed and celebrated. We believe that this allows students to be nurtured and supported and provides a solid foundation for their educational, emotional, social and creative development. At George J. Ryan Middle School, we offer a student-centered program where teachers address the New York State/City Common Core Learning Standards in every subject area. Our teachers strive to produce exceptional lessons emphasizing individual and group instruction with that encourages student exploration and investigation, and promote critical thinking skills. George J. Ryan Middle School Student Demographics Enrollment: 1432 Asian: 71% | Black: 6% | Hispanic: 9% | White: 13% We are a Chancellor’s Select School in the following categories: Learning Partners Plus School: 1 of 11 schools selected citywide to showcase best practices   Common Core Lab School: 1 of 37 select schools in NYC. Our students participate in various competitions and research programs such as: Math Counts, Science Olympiad, Robotics, Underwater Robotics, Debating, Talent Show, Earth Day, Spelling Bee, STEM/STEAM, Hall of Science and various Thematic Essay Writing competitions. Chess Team, Boys and Girls Basketball, Co-ed Softball and Volleyball Team, Track, Soccer, Guitar Club, and Theatre Club are among the many clubs/teams offered at George J. Ryan Middle School. Our Saturday Academy offers: Architecture, Art, Dance, ESL Enrichment, Filmmaking, Photography, and Theater. 0  Our Student Organization, composed of elected Ryan senators from each academy, promotes school and social involvement by supporting issues that concern Ryan Middle School students, the community, and the world-at-large. Our Project Boost Team prides itself on participation in various community service and cultural activities. Each year, we participate in Toys for Tots, NY City Harvest Food Drive, Adopt a Soldier, and The Breast Cancer Awareness Walk. Students also have an opportunity to visit museums, attend Broadway shows, Chinatown and the South Street Seaport. George J. Ryan Middle School is a school where parents are regarded as partners in their children’s education. Parents are encouraged to participate in planning and decision-making. Our active PTA works vigorously with the school to improve it in any way it can. Our parent involvement committee has worked with the school to create better options for school/home communication including: PupilPath (online and text msg.), Principal’s Weekly Phone Messages, Monthly Parent Calendars, Monthly Parent Newsletters At George J. Ryan Middle School, we strive to provide opportunities for our students to become independent and active learners, critical thinkers, and responsible and well-rounded individuals. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. George J. Ryan Middle School Student Demographics: English Language Learners: 11% Students with Special Needs: 11% We have an established Gifted Program called IGC. The program has been in existence for 10 years. Incoming applicants take a Gifted and Talented exam created by Dr. Seokhee Cho from St. John’s University. This assessment covers general academics, logical thinking, and intellectually gifted attributes. There is a writing component and an interview. Students are ranked for admission into our prestigious IGC class. 1. The IGC curriculum is accelerated and was created by George J. Ryan Middle School IGC teachers with assistance from professors at St. John’s University. IGC students receive additional weighted average grades based on the accelerated coursework. 2. Since its inception, 98% of our IGC students get into NYC Specialized High Schools. Last two (2) years, all our IGC students (100%) were accepted into Specialized High Schools. 3. We have a partnership with St. John’s University: a. That allows our IGC teachers access to best practices for teaching intellectually gifted children and several of our IGC teachers have received certification for Gifted and Talented instruction through that partnership. b. College Immersion Program 1  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. George J. Ryan Middle School’s School Quality Snapshot states we received "good" ratings in the following:  Effective School leadership   Trust Strong Family-Community Ties in 2017, based on that data analysis, we concluded that we needed to focus on being transparent and communicating at a greater rate with all constituency groups including students, parents, and teachers. Administrators reviewed improvement strategies for observations and feedback, teachers shared best practices for reaching out to parents, and our SLT discussed viable options to improve trust and communication among all community members. 2018 George J. Ryan Middle School Instructional Goals/ Foci  All core subject teachers will look at increasing writing as part of the curriculum.  Technology will be utilized more across all subject areas to promote teaching and learning.  All teachers will use summative and formative assessment data to drive instruction and instructional next steps. Current School Challenges: Increasing parental involvement; improving the leadership pipeline; increasing and improving the creation/revisions of common core learning standards based curriculum; creating systems for increased teacher collaboration 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q216 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1464 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 53 53 5 29 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 61 42 10 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 67.0% % Attendance Rate 57.8% % Reduced Lunch 6.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 13.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 14.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.25 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 79.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 84 82 96.4% 10.3% 12.7% 4.9% 65.8% 2.0% 8 22% 7.4 78.9% 80% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A YES YES YES YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. George J. Ryan Middle School received a “Well-Developed” designation in all five (5) areas on our most recent NYC Quality Review. Our school data for the current year is as follows: English Language Arts: 72% Levels 3+4, 23% Level2, 5% Level 1 Mathematics: 73% Levels 3+4, 21% Level 2, 6% Level 1 Common Core Algebra: 100% Levels 3+4 Science: 90% Levels 3+4, 9% Level 2, 1% Level 1 Earth Science: 100% Levels 3+4 NYSESLAT: 29% Level 5, 38% Level 4, 7% Level 3, 11% Level 2, 16% Level 1 NYC Learning Environment Survey: 88% Positive Responses for Rigorous Instruction (above city average) Schools strengths: Common Core aligned curriculum in all content areas, Established grade/content teacher teams, students’ achievement on the rise in both ELA and Mathematics, Instruction aligned to meet the needs of all students including SWDs and ELLs School Needs: Based on the 2015-16 standardized examinations, we need to improve using data-driven instruction to improve Mathematics for our SWDs, specifically an improvement of the self-contained student population. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 4  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will deepen work around the Next Generation standards by engaging closely with and examining school-wide implementation of the Framework for Great Schools in two core subject areas (ELA, Mathematics) for SWDs in preparation for the NYS ELA and Mathematics standardized examinations as measured by a 3-5% increase in proficiency on the Datacation DDS ELA and Mathematics baseline and end-line assessments which should translate to improvement on the NYS assessments. 5 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrators, Model Teachers, All Teachers SWD ELA and Math Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Model Teachers September 2018- April 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Model Teachers SWD ELA and Math Teachers September 2018- May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Model Teachers SWD ELA and Math Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Model Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  School leadership will meet weekly with Self-Contained SWD teacher leaders, join team meetings on a regular basis, and coordinate this work across grades. SWD ELA and Mathematics teachers will engage in job-embedded professional learning as they explore ways to implement pedagogical practices that focus on the following instructional shifts: assessing summative data, adjusting curriculum based on summative and formative data, lesson planning, and literacy standards implementation. SWD ELA and Mathematics teachers will participate in weekly team planning meetings that focus on assessing summative data, adjusting curriculum based on summative and formative data, lesson planning, literacy standards implementation. This will be measured by the following evidence: PD agendas, teacher team agendas, pacing calendars, curriculum maps, and unit/lesson plans. SWD teacher teams will meet regularly to design strategies for educating families to deepen their understanding of rigorous instruction so they can support their children at home. They will use PupilPath as a base of communication with whole group, small group, or individual parents. The SWD ELA and Mathematics teachers will continue to receive training Google education to use tools (i.e.-Google drive, Google docs, etc.) to share documentation with parents to support their children away from school. SWD ELA and Mathematics teachers will use Tuesday's parent engagement time to present workshops, call, or meet with parents to support the process. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 6  August 29, 2018 Incoming 6th Grade Parent Orientation Workshop KP: Principal, APs, Model Teachers, Parent Coordinator September 2018 Welcome back to School Night KP: All School pedagogical staff, all administration, parent coordinator Sept 2018-June 2019 Select Monthly PTA Workshops During PTA Meetings (Topic-Instruction and/or Common Core) KP: PTA President, Parent Coordinator, AP Oct 2018-June 2019 Monthly Parent Workshops KP: Parent Coordinator, Various School Personnel (based on topic) including teachers and APs, Principal Sept 2018-June 2019 Terrific Tuesday Parent Involvement Designated Time KP: Teachers, APs, Principal, Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: APs, Model teachers, teacher leaders Budget resources: Funding for model teachers, curriculum-building per session/per diem Instructional resources: Materials for 6th, 7th , and 8th grade ELA and Mathematics Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7  Mid-point Benchmark(s): By February 2019: Curriculum Development-Adjusted curriculum in ELA and Mathematics for SWDs will be created and available for future revisions, if deemed necessary. The SWD teacher teams will be in place working weekly on curriculum design, looking at student work, and create and modify assessments. Students will receive a Datacation DDS assessment and this data will assist us in knowing whether we are on target for our 3-5% goal for the end-of-year assessment in June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Datacation DDS Mid-point Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? George J. Ryan Middle School received a “Well-Developed” designation in all five (5) areas on our most recent NYC Quality Review. Our school data for the current year is as follows: English Language Arts: 66% Levels 3+4, 27% Level2, 7% Level 1 Mathematics: 73% Levels 3+4, 21% Level 2, 6% Level 1 Common Core Algebra: 100% Levels 3+4 Science: 90% Levels 3+4, 9% Level 2, 1% Level 1 Earth Science: 100% Levels 3+4 NYSESLAT: 29% Level 5, 38% Level 4, 7% Level 3, 11% Level 2, 16% Level 1 NYC Learning Environment Survey: 86% Positive Responses for Rigorous Instruction (3% above city average) School strengths: Academy structure where school is split in a sense into three (3) smaller learning communities with support in each, Academy coordinators who work with students, teachers, parents, and administrators on student safety, student discipline, student activities, school structure, and day-in/day-out issues/concerns that effect positive school culture; Assistant Principals assigned to each academy; Guidance Counselors assigned to each academy; Student Organization with student Senators selected by the Academy student body to represent them to discuss practices and student issues at Ryan during bi-weekly meetings with staff Needs: Workshops/assemblies/presentations for students with a focus on Respect For All; Workshops for staff with a focus on Respect For All Positive reinforcements embedded into classroom activities for students who are complying with school/class mandates; Opportunities for students to be recognized for the work that they do both in and out of the classroom; opportunities for representatives to have discussions with the administration to get their ideas for improving the school with a focus on a safe/supported environment Part 2 – Annual Goal 9  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Based on our success with our goal from 2017-18, we will continue this trend with a similar goal for 2018-19. By June, 2019, at least 95% of teachers will create a safe environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences , tailored to the strengths and needs of all students, and leads to safe, supported environments where students are challenged by their teachers and peers. There will be a school goal of improving students’ social emotional and physical learning. This will be measured by principal’s suspension data (5% reduction from 2017-18), and guidance/social worker data (5% increase in at-risk counseling sessions, 2% decrease in S.A.T. referrals for existing students). 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). By September 2018, all staff members will engage in workshops/presentations promoting and training on student social-emotional and physical learning (SEPL) utilizing Brain Power. Included in that training will be the following: -Brain Power Protocol By June 2019, focusing on creating a culture through instructional best practices where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers, all Ryan community member constituency groups (students, teachers, parents, and administration) will have workshops on improving focus, managing stress and test anxiety, increased productivity, and confidence and positivity by Brain Power Wellness By December 2018, all students, including SWDs and ELLS, will participate in three (3) classroom visits with the Brain Power Wellness program specialists on physical and mental brain breaks, mindfulness practices, and social emotional strategies that support a positive classroom atmosphere. By June 2019, the school will have multiple celebrations focused on recognizing students, including SWDs and ELLS, from each class for the work that they do both in and out of the classroom at PTA meetings, student assemblies, Parent Newsletters, school website, and Principal’s weekly phone messages to school community. All teachers, administration, students, parents October 2018 to June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 1 All teachers, paraprofessionals, administration, guidance counselors, SAT, and support staff who deal directly with students. All teachers, students, parents, and administration September 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, SAT September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals All teachers, Administration, all students September 2018 to December 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, S.O. Coordinators, Academy Coordinators, Guidance Counselors Principal, Assistant Principals, S.O. Coordinators, Academy Coordinators, Guidance Counselors, PTA Executive Board, Parent Coordinator, Student Senators  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. August 29, 2018 Incoming 6th Grade Parent Orientation Workshop KP: Principal, APs, Model Teachers, Parent Coordinator September 2018 Welcome back to School Night KP: All School pedagogical staff, all administration, parent coordinator Sept 2018-June 2019 Select Monthly PTA Workshops During PTA Meetings (Topic-Instruction and/or Common Core) KP: PTA President, Parent Coordinator, AP Oct 2018-June 2019 Monthly Parent Workshops KP: Parent Coordinator, Various School Personnel (based on topic) including teachers and APs, Principal Sept 2018-June 2019 Terrific Tuesday Parent Involvement Designated Time KP: Teachers, APs, Principal, Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Principal, Assistant Principals, Teacher Leaders, Teachers, Academy Coordinators, S.O. Coordinators, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors Professional Development time embedded in the weekly schedule, After-School Professional Development opportunities for all staff related to reaching this goal Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2  Checklists, agendas, presentation materials and observation by administration that all parts of the action plan are in place and being executed in a timely manner. Mid-point check-in (February 2019): 2nd Quarterly data checks should produce the following: progress at quarterly checkpoints by administration based on administrative team observations and student infraction data (4% reduction by February 2019). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS and SOHO suspension rates, OORS infraction data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. George J. Ryan Middle School received a “Well-Developed” designation in all five (5) areas on our most recent NYC Quality Review. Our school data for the current year is as follows: English Language Arts: 66% Levels 3+4, 27% Level2, 7% Level 1 Mathematics: 73% Levels 3+4, 21% Level 2, 6% Level 1 Common Core Algebra: 100% Levels 3+4 Science: 90% Levels 3+4, 9% Level 2, 1% Level 1 Earth Science: 100% Levels 3+4 NYSESLAT: 29% Level 5, 38% Level 4, 7% Level 3, 11% Level 2, 16% Level 1 NYC Learning Environment Survey: 88% Positive Responses for Collaborative Teachers (at city average) School(s) strengths: Willingness to learn new ways to collaborate, established teacher teams, teacher leaders, UFT/DOE selected Model Teachers School(s) needs: Based on the 2016 Learning Environment Survey, teachers need to build trust and team building. Additionally, qualitative data shows a need for improved structured opportunities to improve collaboration, Workshops on tuning protocols for our school focus of inquiry: Looking at Student Work, professional development for structures and systems for teacher to teacher collaboration; forms for evidence of collaboration LES Outlier: We are 8% below the city average in regards to teachers saying they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 4  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 50% of teachers will work collaboratively with teachers from other subject areas including , but not limited to, creating interdisciplinary teams with multiple members. As a result, there will be a 0.05 increase measured by teacher responses on the Learning Environment Survey of teachers working in collaborative teams to support student learning showing evidence of lesson planning, LASW, and formative assessments as evidenced by school’s culture, lesson planning, teacher teaming, principals’ embedded work with staff, etc. Specifically, the survey element score will increase from 4.12 to 4.17 for the 2019 school year. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Using the schedule, embed time for opportunities for teachers to meet in Instructional Grade Teams (same content/grade), and Interdisciplinary Teams (different content/same grade/same students). IGTs will meet during the normal school day and interdisciplinary teams will meet during contractual weekly PD sessions. In October and March, create and implement Ryan’s Instructional Team retreat with model teachers, teacher leaders, assistant principals, and principal to create, focus, and monitor the school’s instructional and professional development plans for the school year, including working with SWDs and ELLs. During both retreats, the team will create and monitor the structure for collaborative teacher teams across content areas. The teachers and supervisors on the team will model best practices for this work and will be used as internal resources. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Model Teachers Principal October 2018 to June 2019 Model teachers, lead teachers, UFT Chapter Leader, and administration In November, after Election Day PD, the formation of newly aligned interdisciplinary teams will begin. Creation of common goals, common language, and templates for memorializing success will begin. Select Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Model Teachers Teacher teams will use parent engagement time allocated on Tuesdays to will involve, engage, and educate families to deepen their understanding of Rigorous Instruction so that they can support their children at home. All Teachers, Subject Administrators September 2018 to December 2018 Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. August 29, 2018 6  Incoming 6th Grade Parent Orientation Workshop KP: Principal, APs, Model Teachers, Parent Coordinator September 2018 Welcome back to School Night KP: All School pedagogical staff, all administration, parent coordinator Sept 2018-June 2019 Select Monthly PTA Workshops During PTA Meetings (Topic-Instruction and/or Common Core) KP: PTA President, Parent Coordinator, AP Oct 2018-June 2019 Monthly Parent Workshops KP: Parent Coordinator, Various School Personnel (based on topic) including teachers and APs, Principal Sept 2018-June 2019 Terrific Tuesday Parent Involvement Designated Time KP: Teachers, APs, Principal, Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. HR: All teachers, Model Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal Program for IGT meeting during the regular work week schedule Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point Benchmark: In February 2019, the administration will gather evidence in the form of Team Meeting Agendas, Feedback from teachers found in Team Meeting Minutes; Agendas and documentation from PD 7  opportunities created for teacher teams. Expectations at mid-yr benchmark should be that all teachers are working collaboratively in established teacher teams; thus, by February 2019, 100% of teachers will be working collaboratively in teacher teams to address the shortcomings identified in the teacher survey section of the LES. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher team data submitted by team leaders and uploaded into a school-created collaboration spreadsheet. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. George J. Ryan Middle School received a “Well-Developed” designation in all five (5) areas on our most recent NYC Quality Review. Our school data for the current year is as follows: English Language Arts: 66% Levels 3+4, 27% Level2, 7% Level 1 Mathematics: 73% Levels 3+4, 21% Level 2, 6% Level 1 Common Core Algebra: 100% Levels 3+4 Science: 90% Levels 3+4, 9% Level 2, 1% Level 1 Earth Science: 100% Levels 3+4 NYSESLAT: 29% Level 5, 38% Level 4, 7% Level 3, 11% Level 2, 16% Level 1 NYC Learning Environment Survey: 88% Positive Responses for Effective School Leadership (1% above city average) Strengths: Administrative cabinet, Instructional Team including supervisors, lead teachers, and content area teachers Needs: Improving leadership development with teachers and support staff members not currently on the Instructional Leadership Team; Creating a leadership pipeline all leading to improved student achievement Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May 2019, all members of the administration team will become proficient in one of the following five aspects of leadership (1-Understanding and facilitating difficult dialogues on race, 2-The power of inquiry to spark breakthrough ideas, 3-Helping children succeed, 4-Leadership and self-deception, 5-Using data to solve disproportionality and achieve equity) and turnkey that knowledge to all other members of the team. The impact will be evidenced by the cabinet's 9  ability to use what is learned from the book study to improve teacher observations, staff PD, implicit bias, and improving school culture with a focus on student achievement. Success will be measured by completion of the aforementioned reading materials and minutes/documentation of cabinet professional development book study protocol as well as ADVANCE ratings. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professionally develop, mentor, and monitor all assistant principals in the structures and protocols necessary to turnkey book studies. Assistant Principals Train assistant principals on using tuning, step-back, burning question and other feedback protocols to improve dialogue and discussion(s) to improve supervisory practice. Assistant Principals Principal Principal August 2018-April 2019 August 2018-May 2019 Plan and implement professional development opportunities for mentors and teacher leaders for the purpose of improving pedagogy and student achievement, including SWDs and ELLs. Additionally, parents will be offered workshops to involve, engage, and educate families to deepen their understanding of Rigorous Instruction so that they can support their children at home. Professionally develop, mentor, and monitor model teachers including creating Accountability Partners with building-level supervisors. Model teachers will build upon this Accountability Partner Platform by implementing additional Accountability Partnerships with other teachers and/or support staff with an instructional focus. Mentors, Teacher Leaders, September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Model Teachers Parent Coordinator Model Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Model Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. August 29, 2018 Incoming 6th Grade Parent Orientation Workshop KP: Principal, APs, Model Teachers, Parent Coordinator September 2018 Welcome back to School Night 1  KP: All School pedagogical staff, all administration, parent coordinator Sept 2018-June 2019 Select Monthly PTA Workshops During PTA Meetings (Topic-Instruction and/or Common Core) KP: PTA President, Parent Coordinator, AP Oct 2018-June 2019 Monthly Parent Workshops KP: Parent Coordinator, Various School Personnel (based on topic) including teachers and APs, Principal Sept 2018-June 2019 Terrific Tuesday Parent Involvement Designated Time KP: Teachers, APs, Principal, Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. HR: Principal, APs, Model Teachers, Learning Partner Principals, LPP Facilitators and support staff Other resources: Literature (The Way We Are Working Isn’t Working, Thanks For The Feedback, Instructional Rounds, etc.) Fiscal: LP+ budget Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point Benchmark: By February 2019, 50% of the administrative team will have conducted a successful book study on the leadership topics. APs and the principal will conduct intervisitations and/or department/academy walkthroughs focused on the information obtained and disseminated on the book study work. Administrator development will be evidenced by PD documentation, observations and walkthroughs; Feedback: Model Teachers, APs, Teacher Leaders, Mentors, and meeting agendas Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2  In-house Google Docs teacher/support staff surveys, informal observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. George J. Ryan Middle School received a “Well-Developed” designation in all five (5) areas on our most recent NYC Quality Review. Our school data for the current year is as follows: English Language Arts: 66% Levels 3+4, 27% Level2, 7% Level 1 Mathematics: 73% Levels 3+4, 21% Level 2, 6% Level 1 Common Core Algebra: 100% Levels 3+4 Science: 90% Levels 3+4, 9% Level 2, 1% Level 1 Earth Science: 100% Levels 3+4 NYSESLAT: 29% Level 5, 38% Level 4, 7% Level 3, 11% Level 2, 16% Level 1 NYC Learning Environment Survey: 88% Positive Responses for Strong family/Community Ties (2% below city average) Strengths: working/existing PA; strong SLT with responsive and continuing members of parents, teachers, and supervisors Needs: Moving towards a PTA where teachers take a larger part in the practice of collaborating with parents; increased parent school communication; more opportunities for parents to visit the school and learn how to help their children succeed; increased parent participation (greater numbers). Currently, the PTA consists of 3 teachers who regularly participate (another 3 sporadically participate). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 4  By June 2019, the entire school community will share data in a way that empowers and encourages families to use and understand data to promote dialogue between parents, students, and school constituents centered on student learning and success. Strong Family-Community Ties will increase from 3.49 to 3.54 on the survey element scores from the School Quality Guide. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The principal, assistant principals, teachers and support staff will hold four (4) Open School community opportunities inviting parents to visit the school and have multiple dialogues about student learning and success. The principal, assistant principals, and parent coordinator will host informational parent workshops on student learning and success hot topics such as How to help your child become a better organized student, Common Core Learning Standards, Navigating PupliPath (our school’s data system), High School application process, How to use our school’s website, etc. Parents, Students Parents, Students Principal October 2018-May 2019 October 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator The parent coordinator and principal will host monthly parent focus group meetings with various parent groups to better serve the school community. Parents Teachers and support staff will be available to meet with parents via in-person, telephone, or internet on Tuesdays to discuss data, student learning, and success. Parents October 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal Principal, Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. August 29, 2018 Incoming 6th Grade Parent Orientation Workshop KP: Principal, APs, Model Teachers, Parent Coordinator September 2018 Welcome back to School Night KP: All School pedagogical staff, all administration, parent coordinator Sept 2018-June 2019 6  Select Monthly PTA Workshops During PTA Meetings (Topic-Instruction and/or Common Core) KP: PTA President, Parent Coordinator, AP Oct 2018-June 2019 Monthly Parent Workshops KP: Parent Coordinator, Various School Personnel (based on topic) including teachers and APs, Principal Sept 2018-June 2019 Terrific Tuesday Parent Involvement Designated Time KP: Teachers, APs, Principal, Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. HR: Principal, assistant principals, parent coordinator, SLT members Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-year review: Agendas, minutes from SLT meetings, Minutes from PTA meetings February 2019- Mid-year review: As evidenced by a school-created Google Doc survey mimicking the LES for Strong Family/Community Ties, we will produce a score of 85% satisfaction rate (leading to the June 2019 goal of 3.54). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Learning Environment Survey, Parent Coordinator Google Doc Survey(s) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group; one-to-one When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Before the school day, during the school day, after the school day, Saturday Academy At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher referral, at-risk behavior, RTI Team referral, dean referral, At-risk SETSS; At-risk Counseling Small group; one-to-one 8 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Before and Afterschool AIS English Language Arts; Wilson Reading for identified Level 1 students (20); Targeted instruction by classroom ELA teacher; 8-9 periods of ELA each week Before and Afterschool AIS Mathematics; Targeted instruction by classroom Math teacher; 8-9 periods of Math each week , Lunch and Learn AIS Science, Lunch and Learn Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1, Low-level 2, High-level 2, High-level 3, Low-level 4 Mathematics Level 1, Low-level 2, High-level 2, High-level 3, Low-level 4 Science Social Studies At-risk MOSL Baselines; Teacher assessment Teacher summative and formative assessments Small group; one-to-one Small group; one-to-one AIS Social Studies, Lunch and Learn Small group; one-to-one Before the school day, during the school day, after the school day, Saturday Academy Before the school day, during the school day, after the school day, Saturday Academy Before the school day, during the school day, after the school day, Saturday Academy Before the school day, during the school day, after the school day, Saturday Academy  administration referral 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 13 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  Before and After school academic intervention services, after school and Saturday guidance services, in-school social worker services (purchase additional supplies) 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $12,576 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Non-Title 1 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Non-Title 1 Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Non-Title 1 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Non-Title 1 2  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Non-Title 1 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Non-Title 1 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 3  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. MS 216Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 5  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 6  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) In compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 7  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 8  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act. Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 9  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 0  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: After looking at our NYSELAT data, ELA state scores and Social Studies exam scores from 2017-2018 for our English Language Learner (ELL) population, we noticed our Emerging and Transitioning students struggled with being able to provide text-based evidence in their writing. Additionally, after careful analysis of NYSESLAT and NYS ELA scores for our ELLs and Commanding students (CM), data showed that students made great gains in the Reading multiple-choice questions on both exams, and significant gains on the speaking and Listening portion of the NYSESLAT. However, while students made dramatic gains in these two areas, they made less significant gains in writing responses. As a result, we will focus on: writing strategies for short-response and extended response questions, using text-based details in writing. Current ELLs and CM students are in grades 6, 7, and 8. We have identified 10-12 ELL students per grade, based on in-class writing assignments, standardized test scores, and/or content-teacher input who are writing below grade level standards. Students will work in grade-level groups. The program will take place on Wednesday's, from 2:45 - 4:15, from November 2018 to May 2019. Permission slips will be sent home to inform parents of the program, and daily attendance will be maintained. The language of instruction will be in English. Native language supports provided by teachers include the following languages : Chinese, Korean, Urdu, Hebrew and Bengali. Three teachers who are certified in TESOL will teach the program. Each pedagogue will focus on a different grade level. Materials for the after school program include: 15 per grade Finish Line New York ELLs Bilingual Common Core test prep books including teacher’s edition, guided reading book sets, bilingual dictionaries and other content area materials translated in native languages. These materials will be used exclusively for the Title III After-School program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: 3  Part C: Professional Development Workshops take place during the school day, after school, and during the Monday and Tuesday professional development time. Upcoming Professional Development sessions will include: (1)Utilizing Technology for ELLs in the Classroom; (2) Differentiating Instruction for newcomer/immigrant; and (3) Utilizing assessment data to drive instruction. Every member of the school faculty has identified a SIOP goal as one of their professional goals. Additionally, the ENL department attends meeting that are provided by the Queens North Support Field Center that are geared towards Teaching advanced Literacy Skills to ELLs. The team then, utilizes all that was obtained from the PD and turnkeys to the entire Ryan staff. Members of the school’s faculty will participate in a Collegial ENL Study Group led by the ENL teachers. The team will consist of representatives from all content areas and will focus on: a.) implementing SIOP and other strategies in order to enhance the academic vocabulary acquisition of ELLs, b.) developing structures — including programming and scheduling strategies-- through which ENL teachers and general education teachers can provide instruction that is complementary and coordinated, and c.) providing encouragement and support for ELLs. The participants will explore best practices and share their findings with the members of their departments. The Collegial ENL Study Group will begin in January, 2019 and end in May, 2019. The participants will meet every Thursday from 2:45-3:45 p.m. In order to improve the listening skills of ELLs, our school has partnered with the web-based provider Listenwise. The Listenwise platform uses Common Core aligned blended learning (Listening, Reading, Writing and Speaking) which allows students to consume all types of academic content on their own levels. The George Ryan staff has had several learning opportunities by Listenwise and are utilizing the program in their content area classes. This school year we have added Brain Power Wellness for high performance learning. Brain Power is a program designed for the teacher and the students, it helps the Ryan Community build engaging and interactive activities to create a calm classroom environment. This program is beneficial to the ELLs in the school, as there is a team of talented and passionate trainers who come in weekly to help implement the tools and activities with maximum effectiveness. Teachers are asked to utilize the exercises and activities for the students health and well being.additionally, the program is geared towards Social Emotional Learning (SEL) to create a productive, positive, and passionate classroom atmosphere. The TESOL-certified teachers will prepare Professional Development presentations for the staff. The strategies presented in these workshops will then be implemented by content area teachers. Presentations will focus on Collaborative Strategic Reading (CSR), implementing Listenwise, interpretation of NYSESLAT/NYSITELL scores, utilizing technology in the classroom and other pertinent topics. CSR is a research-validated instructional model designed to improve reading comprehension and content learning for ENLs in grades 6-11. The Sheltered Instruction Observation is an approach to teaching that promotes language development and content-area learning. Participants will learn how to create language and content objectives, plan for meaningful activities, teach and emphasize key vocabulary, employ techniques that make information comprehensible, incorporate activities that encourage peer to peer interaction to foster academic language development, and provide a comprehensive of review of key concepts and vocabulary at the end of each lesson. Instructional Grade Team (IGT) meetings address teaching strategies and student specific questions and concerns. Professional Development meetings take place monthly while school based IGT meetings are arranged once per week and is based on data driven instruction. Built-in, weekly, grade-specific professional development as well as weekly cabinet meetings, offer ample opportunity to share and discuss best practices and next steps. Teachers will assess ELL student progress in all content areas during professional development periods. 4  Part C: Professional Development Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The ENL Department, Ms. Yusupov, Ms. Yonk, and Mr. Scheno work closely with the Parent Coordinator, Mr. Nichols to maintain communication with families. At the beginning of the school year, we hold an annual meeting in collaboration with our Parent Coordinator to introduce the ENL Team, discuss NYSESLAT scores, and identify areas in need of improvement for individual students. Our Parent Coordinator also holds monthly meetings to support Chinese and Bengali -speaking families. Parents are informed about these meetings by sending home notices/ via e-mail each month in English and their home language. These meeting keep parents up-to-date on important events happening at the school. Parents also have the opportunity to express concerns and ask questions during these meetings. The school provides a variety of opportunities for parents of ELLs to discuss the program and progress of their children, including a NYSESLAT introductory workshop, individual conferences during weekly parent engagement time, weekly communication via Skedula, Edmodo, or Pupil Path, pre-testing NYSESLAT test preparation workshop, and a Multicultural Night and Celebration. Agendas are provided for each meeting that is held. Also, attendance is taken and kept in a data binder by the ENL coordinator, Ms. Yusupov. Provisions for communication are provided by bilingual pedagogues and Over the Phone Translation Services. The ENL department teachers are bilingual in Chinese, Hebrew, Russian and English and one of their roles is to focus, primarily, with assisting parents navigate the educational system. In addition to our bilingual ENL department, many of our staff members are bilingual in the majority of our ENL linguistics needs. Currently we have staff members fluent in 10 Spanish, 1 Farsi/ Arabic, 2 Hebrew, 4 Mandarin, 2 Greek, 3 Korean, and 2 Bengali speaking staff members. A staff member from each of these linguistic groups is always present at PTA, PTC, Open House and our Title III Parent Outreach workshops. Internal translation needs are currently met, but in the event in-house translation is unavailable, we will utilize the Translation and Interpretation Unit via phone, to communicate with parents. ELL parents are involved in many different aspects of MS 216 activities . Parents are invited to chaperon numerous field trips with our ELL population. Field trip destinations this year included: the Museum of Moving Image, film screening, Queens College Show - Holiday's Around the World and Queen’s Museum. These parents also play a strong role in the PTA by attending monthly meetings and helping with fund raising. Annually our school hosts a career day, ELL parents help with the organization of this day. For the past two years MS216 hosted a Multicultural Night. This fair was a celebration of the many cultures represented by the English Language Learners at our school. Students worked on presentations in class the last weeks of school and shared these with family members. Parents were encouraged to bring in a type of 5  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities food that represented their home country. They were also invited to attend an awards ceremony for ELLs who showed improvement throughout the year. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount $9,800.40 Wednesday: $6860.28 3 teachers x 1.5 hours x 25 sessions x $60.65 Thursday: $2940.12 8 teachers x 1 hour x 6 sessions x $60.65 $2021.60 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Money allocated to pay for teacher per session Supplies for ENL afterschool program including: Getting Ready For the NYSESLAT 6-8 Vocabulary Links Levels: F-H Historical Fiction and Non-Fiction texts -Translated texts -Dictionaries -Gen. supplies: paper, writing utensils, etc. 6  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount $250- Refreshments for Parents $550- Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Parent Engagement: Supplies for parent workshops. For example, paper, pens, workbooks, etc. 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name George J. Ryan Middle School Borough Queens School Number 216 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Reginald Landeau Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher E. Yusupov ENL Teacher/Subject Area Steve Scheno ENL Teacher/Subject Area Rachel Druker ENL Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Danielle Giunta Assistant Principal Ajith Satyanarayana Coach N/A School Counselor Sandy Kovacs Parent Avian Davis Parent Coordinator Jordan Nichols Field Support Center Staff Member Gary Goldenback Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1432 8 Total number of ELLs 112 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.82%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 4 3 1 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In content-area classes, English Language Learners are assessed through teacher-created baseline tests in ELA, Social Studies, Science, and Math to determine prior knowledge and skills. This data is used to inform instruction and differentiation needs for ELLs in content-area classes. Students are regularly assessed through teacher-created assessments, quizzes, student-teacher conferences, teacher observations, and self-reflections. In addition, ENL teachers administer a baseline NYSESLAT writing task to assess writing skills in accordance with the NYSESLAT writing rubric. This writing task is based on released test questions. Throughout the year, ELLs are formally assessed through writing tasks in the content areas. This data is used to guide instructional planning and group students based on skills, areas in need of improvement, strength, and student interest. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 9  Content-area teachers and ENL teachers collaborate during common planning time and grade team meetings to analyze data and differentiate instruction. ENL teachers push in to content-area classes to facilitate learning among the various ELL groups in the class. In order to support content-area teachers, the ENL department has prepared and presented professional development on interpreting NYSESLAT data, and on differentiating instruction for ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? As stated, in content-area classes, English Language Learners are give teacher-created baseline tests in ELA, Social Studies, Science, and Math to determine prior knowledge and skills. This data is used to inform instruction and differentiation needs for ELLs in content-area classes. In addition, ENL teachers administer a baseline NYSESLAT writing task to assess writing skills in accordance with the NYSESLAT writing rubric. This writing task is based on released test questions. Throughout the year, ELLs are formally assessed through writing tasks in the content areas. Summative assessments to identify progress and areas of need include the NYSESLAT exam and the ELA exam. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? As stated, content-area teachers and ENL teachers collaborate during common planning time and grade team meetings to analyze data and differentiate instruction. The ENL department has prepared and presented professional development on interpreting NYSESLAT data, and on differentiating instruction for ELLs. Furthermore, the ENL and content-area teachers collaborate to select students who will participate in the Title III ELL After-School Program for additional reading and writing support from the ENL Teacher. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Summative assessments to identify progress and areas of need include the NYSESLAT exam and the ELA exam. The NYSESLAT scores are evaluated using the EDAT and RLAT. Student progress is tracked from year to year and analyzed to show areas of growth and areas in need of improvement. Additionally, the EDAT is used to focus on the progress toward achievement of proficiency for specific subgroups of ELLs, and the design of effective instructional programs and/or interventions for those targeted students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL department has prepared and presented professional development on interpreting NYSESLAT data, and on differentiating instruction for ELLs. The ENL department has attended professional development meetings on preparing the EDAT using ATS data and will disseminate this information to the staff. The ENL department prepares an online database of all ELLs within the school to provide accessible information to teachers regarding student levels, home languages, years as an ELL, and IEP status. Part IV: ELL Programming 0  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Current (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding) and Commanding (who have tested out within 2 years) ELLs are grouped into heterogeneous classes. Integrated instruction is implemented when ENL teachers push-in to these classes, or the classes are taught by dually certified ENL/Content-Area teachers. Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning ELLs are also supported by small group pull-out, stand-alone ENL instruction with an ENL-certified teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL department collaborates with the Guidance Department to group students into classes, in order to ensure that ELLs will be able to be provided with the mandated number of instructional minutes. These groupings are based on summative NYSESLAT data. The ENL department then creates a schedule to deliver these instructional minutes. Integrated ENL/ELA instruction is delivered in ELA and Social Studies classes for Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding students when the grade-level ENL teacher co-teaches with the ELA or Social Studies teacher, or when the class is taught by a dually certified ENL/Content-Area teacher. Stand-Alone ENL instruction is provided to Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning students with the ENL teacher. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All instruction is delivered in English, with bilingual support from teachers in Chinese, Russian, or Spanish, and translations provided as needed from Google translate, bilingual dictionaries, and teacher-created glossaries. Instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible include pre-teaching vocabulary, using visuals, connecting to students’ prior knowledge and experiences, teacher modeling, read alouds, graphic organizers, use of technology, jigsaw reading, total physical response, SIOP lesson structure, Collaborative Strategic Reading, mnemonic devices for writing structure (RACE= Restate, Answer, Cite Evidence, Explain), and Cornell note-taking strategies. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish speaking ELLs who score below proficiency level on the NYSITELL are further evaluated in their native language using the Spanish LAB-R. Additionally, throughout the year, the ENL teachers provide ELL students with testing accommodations, (such as: testing in their native language) in certain content areas to ensure that the ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native languages. 1  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. a. SIFE Stand-Alone: The NYCDOE Common Core Aligned Units for ELLs are used to instruct Newcomer and SIFE students in ENL stand-alone classes. The units are adapted and expanded to provide students with basic vocabulary and many listening, speaking, reading, and writing opportunities. SIFE students focus on handwriting, phonics, and key sight words. Content-Area Classes: SIFE students are supported by the ENL teacher in content-area classes. In content- area classes students access translations as needed from Google translate, bilingual dictionaries, student translators, and teacher-created glossaries. Vocabulary is pre-taught, grade-level texts are differentiated, audio is provided or texts are read aloud, visuals are provided to support comprehension, graphic organizers and outlines are provided. Flexible student groupings support language development and comprehension. b. Newcomer Stand-Alone: The NYCDOE Common Core Aligned Units for ELLs are used to instruct Newcomer and SIFE students in ENL stand-alone classes. The units are adapted and expanded to provide students with basic vocabulary and many listening, speaking, reading, and writing opportunities. Content-Area Classes: Newcomer students are supported by the ENL teacher in content-area classes. In content- area classes students access translations as needed from Google translate, bilingual dictionaries, student translators, and teacher-created glossaries. Vocabulary is pre-taught, grade-level texts are differentiated, audio is provided or texts are read aloud, visuals are provided to support comprehension, graphic organizers and outlines are provided. Flexible student groupings support language development and comprehension. c. Developing Developing students are supported by the ENL teacher in content-area classes. In content- area classes students access translations as needed from Google translate, bilingual dictionaries, and teacher-created glossaries. Vocabulary is pre-taught, grade-level texts are differentiated, audio is provided or texts are read aloud, visuals are provided to support comprehension, graphic organizers and outlines are provided. Flexible student groupings support language development and comprehension. d. Long Term Long Term ELLs are supported in content area classes with small group instruction from the ENL teacher, a focus on vocabulary development, and reading and writing skills: mnemonic writing strategies (RACE = Restate, Answer, Cite, Explain), Collaborative Strategic Reading, NYSESLAT test preparation, and Guided Reading lessons. e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Former ELLs are supported by the ENL teacher in content-area classes 2 periods per week. Students at this level complete grade-level tasks with additional time, as needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs focus on vocabulary development, and reading and writing skills: mnemonic writing strategies (RACE = Restate, Answer, Cite, Explain), Collaborative Strategic Reading, NYSESLAT and ELA test-taking skills, Guided Reading lessons, graphic organizers, and outlines. Grade-level materials include differentiated texts from NEWSELA, Reading A-Z.com, Listenwise, Ready ELA, and Finish Line New York ELLs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2  The criteria used to place ELL-SWDs is based on their IEPs and data collected throughout the year during their annual review meeting. Within these settings, ELL-SWD will receive language acquisition instruction through various scaffolds and differentiated instruction from a certified licensed pedagogue. Lessons incorporate the use of technology, ipads, laptops and the smartboard, and are tailored to meet the needs and interests of the students. We ensure that all ELL-SWD have flexible programing and smaller groups to enable diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least-restrictive environment. For example, based on teacher recommendation, selected ELL-SWDs are mainstreamed for content-area general education classes, to have the opportunity to learn in the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs include small-group tutoring, after-school programs, and social-emotional support groups. After-school programs are offered in ELA and Math for students, including Developing and Long-Term ELLs, who did not show growth in their standardized test scores from the previous year. Title III After-School is offered for Newcomer, Developing, and Long-Term ELLs for additional reading and writing support and test preparation skills. Each ENL teacher holds a weekly social-emotional support group for Newcomer and SIFE ELLs to build students’ feelings of belonging and motivation as they adjust to a new school culture and environment. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The ENL Department will continue to hold the Title III After-School program and will build on the writing instruction to be aligned with the NYSESLAT exam. Social-emotional groups will continue to be held weekly for SIFE and Newcomer ELLs, with improvements in collecting qualitative data to evaluate the programs including student reflection surveys. The ENL Department will partner with Listenwise.com, as they develop new curriculum resources to support Newcomer and Developing ELLs. These resources will be utilized with the Newcomer and Developing ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs and their parents are provided with equal access to all school programs as correspondence and letters pertaining to these programs and supplemental services are translated in multiple languages. We offer the following supplemental and after school services to ELLs in our building: Title III ENL/ESL program, Beacon Program, ELA and Math Test Prep classes and Saturday Chinese Language Program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to support ELLs include NYCDOE Common Core Aligned Units for ELLs (SIFE/Newcomer), Google translate, bilingual dictionaries, teacher-created glossaries, NEWSELA.org, Listenwise.com, Reading A-Z.com, Finish Line New York ELLs, Ready ELA, the Longman Social Studies series (Ancient World, Modern World, United Stated History) and Longman’s Sciences series. The Longman series of texts are NYS standard aligned and Common Core aligned for ENLs. All ELLs, especially ELL-SWDs, learn best through visual representations and models. The above-mentioned resources greatly support all ENL groups. Other scaffolded texts used include NYSTROM Atlas series and Teacher Created Curriculum Materials the Modern World. All these materials correlate directly to the grade standards and common core standards. 3  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language support is delivered by the use of technology: laptops, ipads. Additionally classroom libraries which feature texts both in English and the native language: bilingual dictionaries, and glossaries. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The required services support the ELLs by keeping up with the adolescents interests ; the use of technology is also used to support the ELLs in the class. Students are provided with age appropriate and grade level materials to further support their needs. Our Title III After School program specifically targets EN, EM and SIFE ELLs. We have grade team meetings on a weekly basis to constantly assess the ELLs needs in literacy heavy classes. During these meetings, lessons and student work are reviewed and the ENL team makes recommendations for specific ELL modifications. The modifications might come in the form of differentiated readings, front-loading academic vocabulary, graphic organizers, or other ELL support systems. All ELL- SWDs receive services as required by their IEP in addition to any related ENL services. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Classroom libraries that are in the students native languages, are purchased at the middle school level. They are used to help newly enrolled ELL students adjust to the changes. Additionally, new ELLs who are enrolled within the school year are buddied up with another native speaking student to assist him/her with the adjustment. The new ELLs are also exposed to many activities that incorporate their native language, so that they are able to have an easier adjustment and don’t struggle with culture shock. Each ENL teacher, in collaboration with the guidance department, holds a weekly social-emotional support group for Newcomer and SIFE ELLs to build students’ feelings of belonging and motivation as they adjust to a new school culture and environment. The incoming 6th graders are provided with the opportunity to visit Ryan 216 at the end of the school year. The children take a tour of the building and are introduced to administrators, deans, counselors, and teachers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All students at MS 216 including ELLs are offered Spanish as an elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 4  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? External Professional Development will be provided by the Office of ELLs External Professional Development and will include teaching strategies such as Collaborative Strategic Reading (a research-validated instructional model designed to improve reading comprehension and content learning for ELLs in grades 6-11), preparing data using the EDAT tool through ATS, NYSESLAT implementation and scoring, and ELL scheduling and identification. External Professional Development will be turn-keyed for the staff. The ENL Department will develop and present Professional Development sessions for the teaching staff on several topics including: Interpreting and Analyzing NYSESLAT Data, Differentiating Instruction for ELLs, Using Listenwise in the Classroom, and Implementing the Grading Policy for ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. MS216Q meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 for our ENL teachers by conducting weekly Instructional Grade Team meetings. At these meetings, the ENL teachers collaborate with their Assistant Principal (supervisor) to analyze ELL student work, read and discuss professional literature, and research best practices. Each meeting has an agenda in which each attendee signs and receives a copy of the agenda. At each meeting, a designated person takes notes, which are shared with the team and help inform future meetings. These findings may be shared with the teaching staff during professional development time. MS216Q meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 for all teachers through professional development sessions prepared by the ENL department. The ENL Department will develop and present Professional Development sessions for the teaching staff on several topics including: Interpreting and Analyzing NYSESLAT Data, Differentiating Instruction for ELLs, Using Listenwise in the Classroom, and Implementing the Grading Policy for ELLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides a variety of opportunities for parents of ELLs to discuss the program and progress of their children, including a NYSESLAT introductory workshop, individual conferences during weekly parent engagement time, weekly communication via Skedula, Edmodo, or Pupil Path, pre-testing NYSESLAT test preparation workshop, and a Multicultural Night and Celebration. Provisions for communication are provided by bilingual pedagogues and Over the Phone Translation Services. The ENL department teachers are bilingual in Chinese/ Russian and English and one of their roles is to focus, primarily, with assisting parents navigate the educational system. In addition to our bilingual ENL department many of our staff members are bilingual in the majority of our ENL linguistics needs. Currently we have staff members fluent in 10 Spanish, 1 Farsi/ Arabic, 2 Hebrew, 4 Mandarin, 2 Greek, 3 Korean, and 2 Bengali speaking staff members. A staff member from each of these linguistic groups is always present at PTA, PTC, Open House and our Title III Parent Outreach workshops. Internal translation needs are currently met and if there are greater needs the DOE Translation Services are used. 5  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents are involved in many different aspects of MS 216 activities . Parents are invited to chaperone numerous field trips with our ELL population. Field trip destinations this year included: the Museum of Moving Image, film screening, and Queen’s Museum. These parents also play a strong role in the PTA by attending monthly meetings and helping with fundraising. Annually our school hosts a career day, ELL parents help with the organization of this day . This year MS216 hosted its first Multicultural Night. This fair was a celebration of the many cultures represented by the English Language Learners at our school. Students worked on presentations in class the last weeks of school and shared these with family members. Parents were encouraged to bring in a type of food that represented their home country. They were also invited to attend an awards ceremony for ELLs who showed improvement throughout the year. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Reginald Landeau, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: George J. Ryan Middle School School DBN: 26Q216 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Reginald Landeau Jr. Principal Ajith Satyanarayana Assistant Principal Jordan Nichols Parent Coordinator E. Yusapov ENL/Bilingual Teacher Avian Davis Parent R. Scheno Teacher/Subject Area R. Drucker Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach S. Kovacs School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: George J Ryan Superintendent: Danielle Giunta DBN: 26Q216 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jordan Nichols Parent Coordinator Elanet Yusupov Rebecca Steven Yonk Scheno ENL Coordinator/ Teacher ENL Teacher ENL Teacher No No No No YES Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. MS216Q ensures that the Home Language Survey is administered to parents at registration, by the ENL teacher to determine the primary language spoken at home. Based on the responses to the Home Language Survey, the school ensures that translation and interpretation services are available in the languages identified. The school maintains appropriate and current records of primary language spoken by each parent, this information is maintained on ATS and on the student's' emergency card. We consult the HLIS, student blue cards, and the student/parent demographic information that is available on Skedula in order to assess parent preferences. In 9  addition, our testing coordinator runs the DNLO in order to determine the breakdown of languages spoken by our students and parents. We refer to these sources in order to determine the amount of materials needed to translate into the various home languages for dissemination to the families. The ELL coordinator also maintains a list of school staff members who are fluent in different languages who can be called upon to translate for parents on an as-needed basis. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Bengali Chinese (Mandarin and Cantonese) Korean Russian Urdu Hebrew Spanish Punjabi Arabic Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? School Calendar monthly Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Written translation services are provided by staff members who speak languages in addition to English and representative of the school community. Members of our staff speak: Spanish, Korean, Greek, 0  Report Cards 4 times a year Benagli, Hebrew, Arabic, Chinese, Urdu, Russian and Hindi. School documents of high importance are translated by staff for dissemination to school community. School correspondence in these languages is done so that all information going home to all parents/ families is delivered simultaneously with that delivered in English. If we come across a language that we are unable to translate in house we reach out to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation. Comments translated in home language when needed School Handbook at the beginning of the school year same as above response IEP as needed Parent-Teacher Conference Notice 4 times a year After School Program Notice as needed We use the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation. same as above response same as above response ELA/Math/NYSELAT parent workshop Notice once a year for each exam same as above response Back to School Letters at the beginning of the school year same as above response Parent Survey towards the end of the school year same as above response ENL Continued Entitlement and Non-Entitlement/ Transition letters at the beginning of the school year HLIS- Home Language Identification Survey during the enrollment process Print out the copy from the DOE website in the translated language when needed. Print out the copy from the DOE website in the translated language when needed. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Back to School Night 9/20/18 interpretation service(s)? Oral translation services are provided by staff members who speak languages in addition to English and is representative of the school community. Members of our staff speak: Spanish, Korean, Greek, Benagli, Hebrew, Arabic, Chinese, Russian, Urdu and Hindi. If we come across a language that we are unable 1  to speak in house we reach out to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for over the phone translations. 11/27/18 Parent Teacher Conferences 3/26/19 same as above response Annual Review IEP Meetings 9/5/18 – 6/26/19 same as above response 5/16/19 Parent Engagement Suspension Hearings Disciplinary Meetings PTA Meetings High school Application Process Every Tuesday 2:35-3:15 PM as needed as needed same as above response same as above response same as above response 3 rd Wednesday of each month same as above response morning & evening presentations 10/17/18 same as above response Parent Orientations (Newcomers) as needed same as above response 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. At MS216 our school's communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency is to send out a blast phone call from School Messenger, ATS, or PupilPath. Additionally, we have staff members that are fluent in Spanish, Korean, Greek, Benagli, Hebrew, Arabic, Chinese, Russian, Urdu and Hindi that could make phone calls as needed in the parents' preferred language. Lastly, we would also utilize the Translation and Interpretation Unit for over the phone translations Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Interpretation is provided by in-house school staff, when available, or is provided with the use of the Translation and Interpretation Services Unit. The information regarding Over the Phone Translation and Interpretation Services has been distributed to each staff member with the telephone number of the unit that will translate for parents. This is reinforced with a reminder to school staff, prior to parent/teacher conferences. Teachers and staff members are provided with the phone number and the procedure to contact the over-the-phone Interpretation Services if needed. Additionally, they are provided with the Language ID Guide to assist the parents with the different languages they could choose from. Lastly, we review and distribute Language Line's “11 Helpful Tips for Working with an Over-the-Phone Interpreter” to make the most of our exchange with a limited-English-proficient parent. We send out frequent reminders via e-mail to utilize these services as needed. 2  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Monthly school calendars and important notices are distributed by homeroom teachers. The monthly calendar and newsletters are additionally posted on the school website, http://www.ryan216.org/. Links to relevant academic information, including EngageNY, standardized testing information, and the NYC Department of ELLs are also provided on the website. These resources are available in various languages. Oral interpretation services are provided by school staff on an as-needed basis during school hours and during all after-hours school programs to which parents are invited. In most cases, school staff who speak needed languages will provide the translation service. If a classroom teacher is needed to interpret, an appointment with the family needing the services is made so that the appointment will not conflict the teacher's/student's instructional time. When teachers need to call parents regarding a student's behavior or academic performance, they ask a colleague who speaks the student's native language to assist in making the phone call or they utilize the Office of Translation and Interpretation services. During Parent-Teacher conferences, our Parent Coordinator recruits volunteer interpreters for the afternoon and evening sessions. A multilingual welcome poster is displayed at the school safety desk and many standard documents/forms are available on the Department of Education website and will be used when needed to communicate with parents, in their language of choice. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? MS216Q utilizes different ways to gather feedback from parents and available services through the parent survey administered at the end of the year. We will also gain feedback about our services when we administer our tri-annual survey to assess the needs of the parents. Lastly, we gain feedback through informal conversations with our parents during early morning arrival and dismissal. 3 
