 75Q224 School Name: P.S. Q224 Principal: DESMOND PARK   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P224Q 307500014224 Pre-K-8 th Grade School Number (DBN): 75Q224 252-17 72nd Avenue Bellerose NY 11426 (718) 831-4024 Phone Number: (718) 831-4026 Fax: Desmond Park DPark@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Desmond Park Erin Betito Denise Newman Desmond Park N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 75 Ketler Louissaint Superintendent: 400 First Ave. New York, NY 10010 Superintendent’s Office Address: KLouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 802-1503 Phone Number: District 75 FSC: (212) 802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Ketler Louissaint Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 400 1st Ave New York 10010 KLouiss@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1504 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Desmond Park Erin Betito Denise Newman N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Juliette Iadanza Lisa Kruger *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Celia Blackman Danielle Hughes Joni Christie Tom Campolettano Melissa Espinoza Signature (Blue Ink) Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ Parent Member/ Secretary Administrator Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission statement's central focus is to underscore the role of teacher collaboration. This is principally demonstrated by our teacher teams working in concert with our administrators and related staff. These teams meet weekly to share samples of student work, analyze data trends, and plan while incessantly striving to increasing student achievement. Each teacher team espouses the very same spirit of respect and cooperation within our school, that our school leadership works tirelessly to engender across sites. We at P.224Q do our best to cultivate and advance a milieu of diversity and inclusivity amongst its learners.   Our mission states: P.224Q is dedicated to achieving high standards for all students through an interdisciplinary team approach that addresses their unique and special needs. All relevant domains are addressed including cognitive, psycho/social, and physical. We are dedicated to assessing, instructing, and shaping behaviors through rigorous formal instruction and nascent pedogodical practices in order to simultaneously build independence and focus on successful post-secondary outcomes. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.224Q is a District 75 school that services approximately 424 students in grades kindergarten through grade eight across five sites. P.224Q is comprised solely of students with Individualized Education Plans illustrating their many special needs. Both alternate-assessment classrooms and standard-assessment classrooms are employed across the many sites to realize each unique student's success. The range of disability classifications include: students with autism, students who are intellectually disabled, students with an emotional disturbance, as well as students with speech and language impairments. Additionally, our student body includes approximately 22% of English Language Learners (ENL). These learners, with the support of the ENL teachers and ENL methodologies, are afforded greater access to all academic content. As a community, P.224Q continuously develops and refines its educational practices over time in order to reflect "best practices." Our school’s beliefs are widely demonstrated in the daily labors of its teachers and the resulting student achievement data. Several of the chief tenets that we champion here at 224Q are that students learn best when: ● They are taught in a safe, nurturing, motivating environment and each student is presented with a well-prepared, relevant, standards-based lesson which fosters independence ● They are taught through meaningful and appropriately challenging curricula with an emphasis on learning through different modalities ● Each student is engaged and motivated to meet for their highest academic and behavioral expectations ● There is a strong collaboration between home and school To enhance learning for each of our students, we partnered with several visual and performing arts programs including Inside Broadway, Town Hall, Queens Museum of Art, and Education in Dance. Additionally, we partnered with the Best Buddies program at IS266 PA to improve and advance positive relationships between mainstream students and P224 middle school students. Working with students on the autism spectrum represents particular and extraordinary challenges. P224Q with the assistance of Queens Services for Autistic Children (QSAC) encouraged and offered training and resources to the all the parents of our students with Autism. Moreover, many of our staff members enrolled in the AUTISM EDU program bolstering their individual skill set in order to employ more effective strategies. The educational apogee of the school year was the volitional attendance and participation in the bi-weekly "master teacher" classes held on site. Half of our 224Q teachers had their lessons videotaped and then reviewed by their peers and administrators using the ADVANCE rubric with a particular focus on Domain 3, Questioning and 0  Discussion. This exercise resulted in both the growth and professional tuning of each teacher's craft for the benefit of the children. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P.224Q is a District 75 school that services approximately 424 students in grades pre-kindergarten through grade eight across five sites. P.224Q is comprised solely of students with Individualized Education Plans illustrating their many special needs. Both alternate-assessment classrooms and standard-assessment classrooms are employed across the many sites to realize each unique student's success. The range of disability classifications include: students with autism, students who are intellectually disabled, students with an emotional disturbance, students with hearing or visual impairments, preschoolers with disabilities, and students with other health impairments. P.224Q also has approximately 98 ELL's. All of our ELL students are ELL-SWDs. Each student’s specific needs are addressed by utilizing a comprehensive set of educational strategies that are wholly consistent with prevailing researched methods. These strategies are used entirely in concert with related service providers, specialists, and support staff. Skills such as receptive and expressive communication, appropriate social interactions, overall gross and fine motor skills receive tremendous attention and remain the central features of our comprehensive program. In addition, students receive tiered and/or graduated instruction in all subject areas that is appropriate to their educational level and ability. The foundation for each student rests on this tailored instructional model. Robust assessments are appropriately conducted to determine the progress of each student across time. Overall, the student's educational framework is always finely tuned and compassionately rendered. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. P224Q has made substantial gains in virtually all domains of our chancellor’s "Framework for Great Schools." These domains include rigorous instruction, collaboration, strong family-community ties, supportive environment, effective school leadership, and trust. In reviewing the Framework for Great Schools, it is certainly noteworthy that our teachers made the most substantive progress by creating and implementing the Rigorous Instruction principle and Collaborating principle with their peers. At P224Q, teachers created both challenging and aptitude-based tasks to ensure that each student may grow beyond their previous levels and improve the precision of the school's instruction. Our teachers consistently showed the willingness to work side by side to this end for the betterment of the student body. Administrators afforded the teaching staff three full periods each week to brainstorm and work together. By encouraging this expert-consensus process each week, teachers were able to focus on selecting, organizing, and surgically implementing methods and practices of the TEACCH program, elements of new ELA and Math curricula, and analyzing P224Q student data to refine our assessments so more defensible and consistent determinations can be made in the future. A final focus for this year, highly germane and applicable to the needs of our students, was two fold. First, to provide “an authentic ELA learning experience that mirrors more closely the writing experiences of their general 1  education peers in community schools.” Secondly, teachers will collaborate to design and employ math assessments that will help students build and generalize their extant math vocabulary. Overall, P224Q staff focused on conducting and applying an academic program and process with several phases, more rigor, and sound rationale than what was applied traditionally in the NYC department of Education to advance our students far beyond what they would otherwise be able to achieve. We will focus on strong family and community ties by offering child driven workshops to generalize information learned in school. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75Q224 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 414 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 45 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 70.0% % Attendance Rate 69.1% % Reduced Lunch 20.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 14.7% % Black or African American 31.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 9.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 89.4% 1.0% 100.0% 19.8% 22.7% 16.9% 8 6% 7.7 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school community believes it is essential for all students to engage in writing on a daily basis and then to share their work with peers in keeping with our instructional focus of peer-to-peer communication. In 2017-2018 standardized classes participated in creating and implementing a writing calendar while using Teacher's College curriculum and rubrics as a guide. This fostered the structure needed in order to improve student's writing while also celebrating student achievement. Teacher's administered a pre and post assessment before each writing theme and tracked independent student growth. In the course of one year, 47% of students moved up at least one grade level according to the Teacher's College writing rubrics. As per our 2015-2016 Quality Review, we received a "Proficient" in 1.1 Ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards. Across all sites, it was determined that P224Q, will focus on student writing growth and development. Taking the following into consideration; the quality review data, 2017-2018 SA writing data, and student feedback, it was determined that there is a need for structured theme writing in all classes across the entire P224Q community. This will be achieved through a variety of writing curriculums, writing continuums, writing calendars, and writing celebrations. This focused effort in writing will allow for students to be exposed to various types of writing while also providing, "An authentic ELA learning experience that mirrors more closely to the writing of their general education peers in community schools." The use of writing curriculums and assessments will provide teachers with the guidance concerning the range of writing skills taught. It will also show the importance of exposing students to diverse text types and strategies for generating a range of topics. This approach will also support teachers as they identify multiple entry points into the content so that all students see themselves as writers. In addition, this will facilitate as well as elaborate the expansion of vocabulary, phrases, categorization and sentence structure of all students. 4  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of students will expand the quality of their writing as evidenced by an average of 1 level increase on functional/grade specific rubrics as monitored by teachers and coaches. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Creation of a hierarchy chart of inquiry teams Teachers September 2018 Administration Coaches and teachers review writing curricula for their student population including Teachers College and First Author. Teachers September 2018 Coaches Administration Coaches Teachers Related Service Providers Teachers will develop individual pacing calendars to plan and track student growth in writing. Ongoing Coaches Teachers Teachers Create student friendly check list with visuals. Teachers September Coaches Students November 2018 Teachers Related Service Providers January March May 2019 Teachers will collaboratively review writing work samples to norm expectations. Teachers create and align rubrics to writing pieces that contain standards, are developmentally appropriate, and academically leveled. Teachers Ongoing Coaches weekly Teachers Teachers September Coaches Students November 2018 Teachers 6 January March May 2019 Attend professional development in order to increase knowledge of writing procedures, techniques, and strategies. Teachers Ongoing Coaches Teachers Bi-monthly scheduled writing celebrations Teachers September Administration Students Coaches Teachers November 2018 January March May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In October 2018, parents will attend a parent workshop on selected writing curriculums that will help parents understand the varied components of writing. Parents will be given strategies to support writing at home. Parent workshops will be given by the ELA Coach, AA, Coach, Autism Coach, and Related Service Providers. Parents will be invited to bi-monthly writing celebrations in order to acknowledge student achievement and promote instructional expectations / carryover at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Classroom Teachers ELA Coach AA Coach Autism Coach Related Service Providers 7  Curriculum Coordinator Instructional Resources: Common core aligned/connected curriculum Schedule Adjustments: Schedules have been created to allow for common planning time and inquiry to promote collaboration among teachers. iPads, computers, Promethean boards, AAC devices Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By September 2018, writing baseline assessments for all students will be collected and analyzed. By October 2018, 5 % of students will show an increase of writing development as per writing continuum. By December 2018, 15% of students will show an increase of writing development as per writing continuum. By February 2019, 18% of students will show an increase of writing development as per writing continuum. By March 2019, 20% of students will show an increase of writing development as per writing continuum. By April 2019, 25% of students will show an increase of writing development as per writing continuum. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Writing Assessments (pre and post) Writing Continuum and rubrics Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to our latest quality review, P224 received a well developed in establishing a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provides supports to achieve those expectations. A Review of SWIS (School Wide Information System) data, Student Levels, and OORS revealed a decrease in students reaching level 3 and 4 for the 2017-2018 school year by 23%. The number of students reaching Level 3 On the Power of Choice Level incentive system declined by 18% from school year 16-17. Despite this data, the number of students who remained on level 1 dropped by 9% from the previous school year indicating that a large number of students continue to use the Power of Choice program to support behaviors. Furthermore 4 students moved LRE from 8-1-1 to 12-1-1 and 3 students are moving LRE to inclusion. Using this data and feedback from teachers, it has been determined that the Power of Choice Program needs to be reviewed and revised for consistency as well as brainstorming and creating protocols and practices to reduce behavioral incidents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P.224Q's Teachers will implement a revised behavior management system and will be retrained by the Behavior Management Specialist and/or Unit Coordinator to increase the number of students on level 3 and 4 on the modified behavior plan by 3% from current school year. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A behavior Committee is selected to spear head changes for Standard Assessment students Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Standard Assessment Students June 2018 Assistant Principals CIT/BMS Teachers Paras Teachers will review current and new research-based policies and protocols such as The Power of Choice for students in crisis Standard Assessment Students September 2018 Assistant Principals CIT/BMS Administration disseminates strategies and procedure and trains staff on protocols Feedback from all staff on the Revised Power of Choice Program one time a month every 3 weeks. Teachers Paras Standard Assessment Students Standard Assessment Students October 2018 Assistant Principals CIT/BMS October CIT/BMS December 2018 February Teachers Paras April June 2019 Crisis Intervention Teachers (CIT)’s meet with teams and conduct classroom walkthroughs to ensure proper implementation while encouraging a supportive environment weekly. Standard Assessment Students Ongoing CIT/BMS CIT in collaboration with Project BOOST will develop and implement appropriate incentives Behavior Committee will meet monthly to review data and monitor growth and provide feedback to staff. Ongoing Assistant Principals CIT/BMS Ongoing Assistant Principals Standard Assessment Students Standard Assessment Students 0  CIT/BMS Teachers Paras 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent classroom orientations for every grade (Pre-K- 5) are conducted in September to inform parents of expectations. In addition to Parent-Teacher conferences, progress report meetings are held throughout the year, especially for at-risk students who are not buying into the new program. A parent workshops will be scheduled to help parents understand the Revised Power of Choice program and how to support behaviors at home. Translations are provided, as necessary. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, Technology Equipment, Per Session for Extended School Day Program, Project BOOST, and Professional Development, for team to research and disseminate information. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will have a 1.5% increase in students reaching level 3 or 4. The behavior team will meet regularly to monitor students’ progress within levels, SWIS data, and OORS reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SWIS Data, student levels, and OORS reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1) All teachers collaborate in highly developed professional learning teams. We consistently look at teacher practice, examine student work and analyze data. Embedded leadership structures are in place. P224 has created a collaborative culture for teachers to do Inquiry work three times per subject on a three-week cycle. This work has had an impact on student outcomes. Evidence can be seen in data collection for each of our foci. Students increased their reading comprehension by 5% and increased their math vocabulary by 5%. According to our last Quality Review December 15 and 16, 2015, the work of the teacher teams has improved practice and established instructional coherence school-wide. Teams inform key decisions regarding curricula, pedagogy, academic and behavioral interventions ensuring a shared commitment to attaining school goals and improved student mastery. According to our last Quality Guide results of 2016-2017, P224Q scored a 4.04 on the Collaborative Teachers section of The Framework for Great Schools. This is 0.09 higher than the New York City school average. -92% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that, at their school, teachers design instructional programs (e.g. lessons, units) together. This is 8% higher than the New York City school average. -90% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels. This is 3% higher than the New York City school average. -95% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school teachers talk with one another about instruction. This is on par with the New York City school average. The teachers collaborated in their Inquiry Teams to create math vocabulary assessments for students that take standard assessments in grades K-8 based on the Go Math curriculum and functioning level. According to the assessment results, the students showed a 14% growth in grade level mathematics vocabulary. The teachers of students that take alternate assessments in grades Pre-K- 5 use problem solving strategies and assessments based on the equals curriculum and functioning level. The teachers of students that take alternate assessments in grades 6-8 use strategies and content-based vocabulary from the attainments curriculum to measure growth. 2) The priority need that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element will be to show growth in critical thinking skills directly related to problem solving in mathematics. The students have shown difficulty 2  understanding which operation to use when presented with a word problem. Vocabulary building and role-playing exercises utilizing instructional mathematics videos will be used as teaching methodologies. Teachers will collaborate during Inquiry meetings and Monday afternoon professional development to research both strategies and how to best align them to meet our school's CEP goal. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will collaborate to create multi-sensory activities to deepen students understanding of math concepts and vocabulary as evidence by a 5% growth over teacher created functional baseline assessment. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students will be administered the teacher created baseline assessment October/November 2018 Teachers September 2018 Administration Coaches Unit Coordinators Administration Teachers Coaches Teachers October 2018 Administration Unit Coordinators Coaches Unit Coordinators Teachers November 2018 Teachers  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Creation of a hierarchy chart of inquiry teams will be established and work to create methods and strategies to incorporate functional vocabulary within math lessons. Teachers will review Attainment, Equals, and GO Math curriculum for vocabulary and related concepts that if understood will accelerate growth in other areas. Teachers will research strategies to teach targeted vocabulary and concepts, specifically instructional math videos Teachers will develop individual pacing calendars to plan and track growth in using vocabulary words and concepts Teachers On going Collaboratively, teachers will review vocabulary being taught and revise delivery of instruction to be more targeted to student needs if necessary Teachers share successful strategies through videotaped lessons and share at Teaching Lab meetings with administration Oct-June 2018-2019 Teachers On going Oct-June 2018-2019 Teachers On going Oct-June 2018-2019 4 Coaches AP Review Teachers Coaches AP Review Teachers Coaches AP Review Teachers Coaches AP Review Inquiry teams on different grade bands will provide in house professional development to support the teaching of selected strategies to deepen understanding of concepts and words. Teachers On going Administration Oct- June Teachers 2018-2019 Coaches Related Service Providers In house professional development will be offered on supporting our ENL students in learning vocabulary. Teachers On going ENL Teachers Strategies to Address Needs of Students With Disabilities Strategies and concepts being taught in the classrooms will be shared with Related Service Providers and Cluster Teachers to ensure use of vocabulary words across subjects. ENL students Pre K-8th Grade Students Sept-Jun 2018-2019 Teachers On going Administration Sept-June 2018-2019 Classroom Teachers Literacy Coaches Unit Coordinators Related Service Providers Curriculum Coordinator Math Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Hold parent workshops on math curriculums to provide parents with information and to help parents understand the teacher collaboration model in selecting math strategies to increase vocabulary comprehension. (Parent workshop to be held by instructional coaches, planned for October) Designated parent outreach times to inform parents of progress in math goal and to discuss teacher and parent concerns. (created by our SBO vote every Tuesday Afternoon) On going daily communication worksheets assessments, and selected strategies updated monthly by teachers. September 2018- Parent breakfast with resources showcasing math focus for the year October 2018- Parent workshop on selected curriculum and math goals for the first trimester will be shared November 2018- Parent Teacher Conferences to discuss individual child's progress December 2018- Functional packet with vocabulary sent home as a resource for parents 5  February 2019- Mid year assessment with strategies to assist parents to reinforce home instruction March 2019- Parent Teacher Conferences discussing child's individual progress regarding vocabulary and instruction May 2019- Parent Teacher Conferences discussing child's individual progress June 2019- End of the year assessment data sent home with strategies for parents to reinforce instruction Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: ● Classroom Teachers ● Math Coaches ● Unit Coordinators ● Related Service Providers ● Curriculum Coordinator Instructional Resources: ● Common core aligned/connected curriculum Schedule Adjustments: Schedules have been created to allow for common planning time and inquiry to promote collaborative teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will have collaborated to create multi-sensory activities to deepen students understanding of math concepts and vocabulary as evidence by a 2% growth over their functional baseline assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 6  Understanding math vocabulary and concepts will be measured by: Curriculum based assessments Pre, mid, post assessments Quantitative data such as tasks Checklists Rubrics Student self assessments Teacher observations Teacher created worksheets and assessments that were generated through inquiry Growth over their functional baseline assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Last year, professional development was focused on improving Domain 3 Competency D (3D): using assessment in instruction. This focus impacted monitoring of learning and student acquisition of knowledge and content. 85% of teachers scored effective or highly effective in Domain 3D in their MOTP. This year, 58% of teachers scored effective in 1E Planning and Preparation with 25 % of our teachers receiving a developing in at least one of their observations. Analyzing our current core curriculums, we identified that the plans outlined by the programs did not represent the specific elements of a highly effective lesson plan and the planning needed for our specific populations. The core curriculums lack the required planning components that are necessary for P224Q educators to deliver highly qualified instruction. Our goal is to provide targeted professional development in 1E to improve effective planning, preparation, and instruction to design coherent, supportive, and engaging learning environments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through targeted professional development and interclass visitations performed by coaches, administrators, and colleagues the percentage of teachers receiving a developing in domain 1 competency E will decrease by 12.5% 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration and instructional coaches will create a professional development plan to improve planning and preparation. Teachers Teachers will gather and share currently implemented unit plans, lesson plans, and research-based strategies during inquiry team collaboration to discuss how to make their instruction better. Teachers Teachers will gather and share assessment results from ABLLS, Web ABLLS, SANDI, and Fountas and Pinell to assist in properly planning data driven lessons. Teachers Teachers will align selected skills from core curriculum to ABLLS assessment DLM Essential Elements and teacher made rubrics aligned or connected to CCLS curriculum to provide clear expectations for learning instruction. Teachers Teachers will breakdown planning based on teaching points, selected standards, and instructional procedures to develop lesson plans that are rigorous and connected to Standards, ABLLS results, and DLM Essential Elements. Teachers Teachers will participate in 1:1 planning conferences prior to participating in peer-to-peer observations to discuss best practices, research-based strategies, student grouping based on student data. Teachers Ongoing October 2018-June 2019 Ongoing October 2018-June 2019 Ongoing October 2018-June 2019 Ongoing October 2018-June 2019 Ongoing October 2018-June 2019 Ongoing October 2018-June 2019 Administration Coaches Teachers Administration Coaches Teachers Administration Coaches Teachers Administration Coaches Teachers Administration Coaches Teachers Administration Coaches Teachers 9  Teachers Ongoing October 2018-June 2019 Teachers will engage in collaborative planning with related service providers and paraprofessionals to ensure the implementation of proper strategies to help students make progress in achieving goals. Teachers will select PD's from District 75 Professional Development line Course Catalog specific to Domain 1- Competence E. Teacher Lab will be offered bi-monthly as a forum to share ideas and instructional best practices in planning and preparation. Teachers Teachers Administration will conduct ongoing informal/formal observations and evaluate the use of best practices, research-based strategies and grouping based on student data. Teachers Ongoing October 2018-June 2019 Ongoing October 2018-June 2019 Ongoing October 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration Coaches Teachers Administration Coaches Teachers Administration Coaches Teachers Administration Coaches Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family Engagement which allows us to have a strong family-community include:  Share videos on best practice on Domain 1E at parent events/workshops every month to help parents understand the planning and preparation of lessons.  Hold parent workshops monthly to help parents understand strategies and instruction that help students generalize across all settings through planning and preparation.  Designated parent outreach times (created by our SBO vote every Tuesday Afternoon)  Utilize parent communication applications such as Class Dojo and Remind to showcase work samples and lesson content updated weekly by teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Instructional Coaches  Classroom Teachers   Unit Coordinators  Related Service Providers 0   Curriculum Coordinators Instructional Resources:  Common Core/Core Curriculum Schedule Adjustments: Schedules have been created to allow common planning time and inquiry to promote teacher collaboration.   Tax Levy money for teacher professional development and support inquiry work.  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By November, 2018, we will see a decrease of 2% of teachers receiving a developing rating By December, 2018, we will see a decrease of 3% of teachers receiving a developing rating By January, 2019, we will see a decrease of 5% of teachers receiving a developing rating. By February 1, 2019, we will see a decrease of 6% of teachers receiving a developing rating By March, 2019, we will see a decrease of 8% of teachers receiving a developing rating By April, 2019, we will see a decrease of 10% of teachers receiving a developing rating By May, 2019, we will see a decrease of 11% of teachers receiving a developing rating Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Rubric Domain 1 competence E Planning and Preparation Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. P224Q has used communication systems such as Class Dojo and Remind to connect with families. The use of these systems promoted and increased parent engagement. Based on the school survey data for the 2017-2018 school year: 96% of parents believe P224 offers activities and services to improve life outcomes for their child 97% of parents feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school 95% of parents say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how parents can help their children learn 97% of parents feel that teachers understand families' problems and concerns In the 2017-2018 school year, 1,344 parents were involved in a total of 35 events at P224Q, which included 8 more workshops/events from the previous year. As a result, parent involvement increased by 623 attendees Based on the data trend of the previous year, P224Q wants to provide meaningful child-driven workshops that will allow the families to learn the skills and then generalize in their home communities. Workshops can include math strategies, reading comprehension strategies, speech activities, PT, OT, and counseling strategies that students have learned in school and can generalize at home. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P224Q teachers, coaches, and related service providers will provide 10 child driven workshops to families by offering interactive trainings, which will include skills that can be implemented and generalized in their home community. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff Sept 2018 Administration Administration will reach out to related service providers, teachers, and coaches, to develop the proposed workshop Administrators will create a calendar of proposed workshops to Staff Sept 2018 Administration be offered every month. A minimum of 1 child driven workshop will be offered. Related service providers, teachers, coaches, and administration Staff Sept. 2018 Administration will collaborate with other sites Administration will create a parent training calendar to be distributed to classroom teachers Parent workshop calendar will be posted on the website at the beginning of October and attendance will be posted after every event Evaluations will be given to parents at the end of each workshop in order to plan for the next training Parent Coordinator Administration Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator Staff Parents Parents October 2018 Ongoing October 2018-June 2019 Staff Parents Ongoing October 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator Staff Related service providers, teachers, coaches, and administration Staff February 2019 * Parent Coordinator will collaborate with other sites to reflect on how their workshops have been going to plan for the remainder of the workshops, based on the evaluations given at the end of the * Staff * Administration workshop 3  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. * We will continue to partner with QSAC * Designated parent outreach time to communicate upcoming workshops and events (Tuesdays 2:20-3:35 as part of our SBO vote) * Parent coordinator to help facilitate workshops * School websites to inform parents of upcoming workshops and events * Remind/Class Dojo to communicate activities at the school Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: * Classroom teachers * Paraprofessionals * Literacy coach * Math coach * Alternate assessment coach * Unit coordinators * Administration * Related service providers * Students Instructional Resources: * Common Core aligned/connect curriculums * Reading A-Z, RAZ Kids application * Communications supports Schedule adjustments: * Schedules have been created to allow for common planning time and inquiry to promote collaborative teachers 4  Tax Levy money used for teacher professional development and support inquiry work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By November 1, 2018, P224Q will provide two child driven workshops to families By February 1, 2019, P224Q will provide a total of five child driven workshops to families By April 30, 2019, P224Q will provide a total of seven child driven workshops to families By June 26, 2019, P224Q will provide 10 child driven workshops to families, by offering interactive trainings, which will include skills that can be implemented and generalized in their home community. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The evaluations at the end of the parent events, with a rating system of how meaningful the workshop was for them, as well as the comments given, will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who score less then 2.75%on state assessments and who are below expected grade level on theFountasand Pinnelassessment Mathematics Students who score less then 2.75%on state assessments and who are below expected grade level on the Scantron assessment When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day : Recess, Literacy block , and Math Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group; Differentiated Instruction One-to-One instruction; Small Group Instruction; Differentiated Instruction Small group; Differentiated Instruction During the school day : Recess, Literacy block , and Math One-to-One instruction; Small Group Instruction; Differentiated Instruction Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Words Their Way, Bookshop Mondo and Fundations are used to improve decoding skills. Great Leaps is used for students in Gr. K-5 to improve fluency. Ready Gen Enrichment Activities, Leap Frog, Scantron resources and I-Pad activities are used to improve vocabulary and comprehension skills NY Ready is used to develop and improve test taking strategies. Fountasand PinellResources, and Reading A to Z Scantron Resources, I-Pad activities are used to improve all skill areas .NY Ready is used to develop and improve test taking strategies. Go Math enrichment activities. These activities are used to improve problem solving skills, number sense and operational skills, Morningsidefluency, 6  Science Social Studies Students who score less then 2.75% on state assessments and who are below expected grade level on theScantronand Fountasand Pinellassessment Students who score 2.75% or below on the ELAstate assessment and are below expected grade level on theScantronand FountasandPinell assessment At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Functional behavior assessments, behavior intervention plans, sudden changes in behavior which is a program to increase fluency through differentiated activities. Students will complete intervention activities as outlined in STEM SCOPES, Harcourt Teacher resource book, Smart Exchange activities, and Brain Pop These activities are used to teach concepts in different modalities and prepare children for the skills needed to succeed on state and local assessments Students will use leveled Social Studies Readers, Harcourt Activities, Brain Pop, and I-Pad activities and a supplemental program Little Passports. These activities Small groups and/or 1:1 instruction During the school day are used to teach concepts in different modalities and prepare children for the skills needed to succeed on state and local assessments. Students will be taught the strategies they need to maintain their behavior and interact Small group; Differentiated Instruction During the school day : Recess, Literacy block , and Math One-to-One instruction; Small Group Instruction; Differentiated Instruction Small group; Differentiated Instruction During the school day : Recess, Literacy block , and Math One-to-One instruction; Small Group Instruction; Differentiated Instruction Small group; Differentiated Instruction During the school day 7  parent request, attendance concerns One-to-One instruction; Small Group Instruction; Differentiated Instruction appropriately in social settings as well as organize their time and materials. Students will be taught pre-vocational skills and transitional skills. Services will be provided by the guidance counselor and/or the School Psychologist. 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 5 students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 1  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 $12,366 0 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 224Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 224Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 5  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 6  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. ● Implementing a new way to communicate utilizing Class Dojo and Remind School-Parent Compact (SPC) P. 224Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Ensure that students meet the State's Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; 7  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 8  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 9  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P224Q's 2018-19 Title III program will focus on community involvement through the arts, transition and community. We intend to serve 60 ELLs with mandates of 6:1:1, 12:1:1 and 8:1:1. These students primarily come from Mandarin and Spanish linguistic backgrounds. Our TITLE III program at P.224Q, the instruction of our Saturday program will be delivered in English by 3 licensed ENL Pedagogues, 1 movement teacher & 1 of 3 rotating content area pedagogues, and six bilingual paraprofessionals. The paraprofessionals selected to work the program will be based on the languages of the students and parents who register to attend. The administrator attending will either be, Principal Mr. Desmond Park, or one of the four Assistant Principals - Mrs. Danielle Hughes, Mrs. Kara Navan, Mrs. Stacey Podolsky, & Mrs. Jamie Allen Zic. For our 3 instructional Saturdays, the ENL pedagogues will collaborate with 1 of 3 rotating content area pedagogues to deliver comprehensive ELL based instruction aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards, CR-PART-154 mandates, and student IEP's. Each weekend session will take place at PS186 the Castlewood School located in Bellerose NY. We intend to conduct three instructional sessions throughout October and November of 2018. We will meet from 8:00am-12:15 pm. Instruction will be designed to meet the needs of our ENL students by differentiating and incorporating different strategies to help foster their language acquisition skills. Our Title III plan will focus on the topics community, health & safety, and transition. We will supplement our instruction with the Early Childhood Themes curriculum purchased from approved vendor Teacher Created Materials Publishing The subjects we will choose for our purchased materials are " My Community, Health & Safety, and Transition." The program is designed to engage and challenge our English Language Learners. It offers the opportunity to develop language through wordless photo books, songs and rhymes. They supply easy to read text and a lap size version of each book to help support student learning and engagement. The lessons will include literacy, language acquisition and art. Being that most of the students attending our program come from an Alternate Assessment background, we would like to start working with them on their pre-transition skills. We would also like students to continue learning and working on their day to day curriculum to give parents an idea on how to assist their children in the work they are doing at school. Parents of participating ELLs will be invited to join instructional session on an ongoing basis.Teachers will also encourage parents to participate in activities with their children to foster a side-by-side learning experience. ENL pedagogues/ content pedagogue will offer different skills and resources to assist families on how to engage their children in the home and in the community while outside of school. Giving parents the opportunity to take charge of their child's learning experience will make them feel connected to our school community while giving them the confidence needed to ensure that they are an integral part of their child's learning success. Mrs. Jessica Milillo, Ms.Nikki Maldonado, and Mrs. Erin Betito will design lessons that are community based encouraging the use of literacy and the arts. Topics will include community, 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information all about me, health and safety, & transition. Our Movement teacher will help incorporate TPR which is an important ENL methodology. Incorporating Total Physical Response into our instruction is critical to aiding in students learning. " While each study may have individual limitations (as any research study must) the majority of the research to date has found that TPR students out perform traditional students on some measures of language skills. The 16 comparative studies reviewed all support the use of TPRs. Ten show advantages for TPRs over another teaching method,and six show mixed results." - Lichtman, Karen - Northern Illinois University - Article - Research on TPR Storytelling. This is important in order to ensure that our students are not only listening, but actively engaging in the lessons and experiences. This ENL methodology will support their learning and we will show this by having students role-play, and walk through the community with teachers and parents to offer a real life experience. Materials that will be used during these sessions include items related the purchased curriculum. Other items will include books, First Authors Curriculum, crayons, Crayola markers, construction paper, glue, rulers, lined paper, coins, clocks, scissors, dry erase markers, and calendars. We will also use a speaker and microphone, projector, lap-top computer & IPADS. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our first professional development (at training rate) will take place in mid November for two hours and twenty five minutes (2:20p-4:45p) with the ENL teachers and a contractor from the purchased community curriculum . The contractor will lead the professional development session. We will take suggestions about how to utilize the program effectively and work as a team to come up with a plan to execute meaningful lessons each weekend. The second professional development will take place in mid November for 1.75 hours ( 2:30pm - 4:15pm). All 7 pedogogues will facilitaite the professional development. Attending will be all 3 ENL teachers, the 3 content teachers (one for each Saturday), 1 movement teacher and the six Paraprofessionals. Although lessons will already be designed, this is a perfect time to invite feedback and ideas from each member of the team. The three ENL pedagogues will lead discussion regarding ENL methodologies. The content teachers will lead discussion on the purchased curriculum as well as executing lessons based on student daily learning. The movement teacher will train staff in TPR best practices. Each session we will have a 25-35 minute period to use the gymnasium. During this time the teacher will be able to give parents a glimpse of what movement looks like for their child, as well as give them positive ways to influence movement in the home and in the community. We will also talk about how we will utilize the IPADS during our Saturday sessions. These were previously purchased in our 2015 plan. We would like to show families how to research different topics to assess amenities in their communities. Topics to discuss with the paraprofessionals & content teachers will include, introducing life skills and career development at the early stages of learning (aligned to the Career Development Occupational Standards/ and the Common Core Learning Standards) and how to implement 3  Part C: Professional Development writing in the home based on the First Authors Curriculum. In order to introduce life-skills (community, transition, health and safety). Our administrator will also be present and involved in our PD session by offering feedback, suggestions, and speaking to the staff about the overall expectations of our program. Our administrator will be remunerated from 3:45 until 4:45 to avoid conflict with regular work day hours. Ongoing professional development is extremely important. " Teachers need to be able to analyze and reflect on their practice , assess the effects of their teaching, and then refine and improve their instruction." Pg. 93 Section : ' Teacher learning that supports student learning' - "Teaching for Intelligence - Second Edition" - Edited by Barbara Z. Presseisen ( Books. google. com) We meet with our team in order to continuously improve our instruction. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents will be invited to attend all sessions with their children, all of the resources mentioned below will be provided to them by the ENL teachers, administrator and paraprofessionals during the selected sessions. Raffle prizes such as t-shirts will be offered to encourage parental involvement. We find parental involvement ensures student success. Parents will attend four Saturday morning sessions from 8:00am to 12:00 pm. Metro cards will be provided to assist families with transportation to and from our school. We like to make each morning accessible to families. During this time the teacher will also be able to give parents a glimpse of what movement looks like for their child, as well as give them positive ways to influence movement in the home and in the community. Refreshments will also be served to parents. - Raffle - Teachers will have families participate in a raffle as an incentive for attendance. We will raffle an IPAD for a lucky family. This will be nice because they will also be trained on how to use it during parent engagement on our Saturday sessions. - Community resources - Libraries in specific neighborhoods , information and resources that can be attained at the library (free of charge). This will give parents more access to engage their families in different opportunities and activities provided by their community. Lessons designed will give parents the resources and skills to utilize their learning inside the home and at school. We would like to introduce our school website and teach each family how to access information that will help them stay connected to our school community. At P.224Q we take pride in our website and we actively update information to keep parents aware and informed with the activities and details of our school. This year, we would like to locate the different libraries in our families communities. We will do this using the computer and iPads provided for that specific session. A lot of libraries in Queens offer many different options on how to become part of the community. They offer classes, seminars, and literacy resources that are often times, free. This is another way to have families connect with the community around them, and when their children are not at school, we are offering them another option to access learning. We will also used the IPADS we purchased for our 2015 TITLE III Plan to 4  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities teacher parents how to research different ways to experience their community. They will learn how to use Google to search for local amenities that will help support them at home. We would also like to invite a member of our PTA to come and join us to speak to our families about becoming a member of the committee. The PTA at our school does a lot to help both teachers and students. Having more members only brings the community closer and gives parents an opportunity to take a leadership role at their child's learning institution. We hope that having a member come will encourage families to want to become more active in the programs at P.224Q. This year, we would also like to offer resources for our families to take home. We would like to give a backpacks (purchased in previous years) with books, pencils, notebooks, crayons, lists of educational resources ( websites, local activities, libraries in the community etc), educational coloring books & folders. Parents will be notified about our program through fliers, phone calls and our P.224Q school website. All information will be translated to meet the language needs of each family. On Tuesdays, the DOE/school schedule has allotted time for teachers to engage in parent outreach. During these times, ENL teachers will make calls to invite and encourage our families to join us for Title III instruction. Teachers also use the REMIND application to communicate with families. We have asked them to announce our program using the application. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Professional Development $1,253.94 Direct Instruction $7,519.12 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1 Wednesday PD @ 1 hour 3 teachers X 1 day X 1 hr each X $27.62 = $82.86 (training rate) ************************************ 1 Thursday PD @ 1.75 hrs 7 Teachers X 1 day X1.75 X $60.65 = $742.96 6 Paras X 1 day X 1.75 hours X $34.73 = $364.67 1 Admin X 1 day X 1 hour X $63.45 = $63.45 ********************************** 3 instructional Saturdays @ 4.25 hrs Each 1 Admin X 3 days X 4.25 hrs X $63.45= $808.99 5  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 5 Teachers X 3 days X 4.25hrs X $60.65 = $3,866.44 6 Paras X 3 days X 4.25 Hrs X $34.73 = $2,656.85 Secretary 5 Hrs X $37.37 = $186.85 Purchased services  High N/A quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) 1 printer X 464.11 $464.11 Ink for printer $61.01 Canon ELPH 190 $153.25 Camera charger $43.96 Camera battery $47.89 Teacher Created Materials. $900.00 Itunes gift cards. $200.00 Consumables $592.98 Consumable instructional supplies for teachers during sessions : Dry erase markers, glue sticks, crayons, scissors , construction paper, raffle tickets NA ************************************** OTPS $2,463.20 NA Parent Engagement $1,127.85 6  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA Travel Other TOTAL 15 - $6.50 Round Trip Metro Card $97.50 Ipad mini $299.00 (Best Buy) (for raffle)$299 Ipad case $40.99 Refreshments for parents $250.00 Resources for families Books , Pencils, community resources, notebooks, paper, folders, markers $300.00 T-shirts /backpacks $140.36 NA Title III - 2018/2019 $12,366 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name P224Q Borough Queens School Number 224 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mr. Desmond Park Coach Ms. Mary Joyce ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher J.Milillo, N.Maldonado, Erin B Teacher/Subject Area Mrs. Elsa Myer/ Teacher Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Mr. Ketler Loussaint Assistant Principal Mrs. Jamie Allen-Zic Coach N/A School Counselor Mr. Lerro Parent Ms. Juliet Ladanza Parent Coordinator Ms. Carin Wallak Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 3 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 438 8 Total number of ELLs 91 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 20.78%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 0 NA NA 0 NA NA 0 K 0 NA NA 0 NA NA 0 N/A N/A NA NA NA NA Lang. N/A N/A NA NA NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 2 0 NA NA 0 NA NA 0 3 0 NA NA 0 NA NA 0 4 0 NA NA 0 NA NA 0 5 0 NA NA 0 NA NA 0 6 0 NA NA 0 NA NA 0 7 0 NA NA 0 NA NA 0 8 0 NA NA 0 NA NA 0 9 0 NA NA 0 NA NA 0 10 0 NA NA 0 NA NA 0 11 0 NA NA 0 NA NA 0 12 0 NA NA 0 NA NA 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Assessment tools used at P224Q include - Fountas and Pinnell, Fundations, SANDI, NYSESLAT, NYSAA, READING A-Z running records, ELSB, Pathways to Literacy, Building with Stories, Teachers College Units of Study Writing Continuum, and teacher made assessments. The insight this data provides about our ELLs highlights their early literacy skills and next steps. This gives teachers the opportunity to properly design instructional goals based on assessment results. During assessment we are able to determine, based on results, if a student is able to : read accurately, fluently & if the student is able to comprehend the text being read. This data helps inform our school's instructional plan because we design instruction based on results. ELL teachers can use IEP's, student NYSESLAT scores, plus assessment evidence to create meaningful instruction aligned to the CCLS. Also, it helps us determine what curriculums will work best with our student population. Based on results, teachers instructional plans will be data related. 9  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We actively use these assessments on a continuous basis. The results of the data collected during the assessments helps support the academic decisions for our students; whether it’s related to groupings or proficiency levels. We group our students based off their results on the above named assessments. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use the NYSESLAT to measure outcomes of student learning. This will assist us in determining if our ELLs make adequate yearly progress. Based on their progress, we will take the necessary steps to enhance our ELL program. Depending on their scores, as per CR-Part-154, schedules are made based on Integrated and Standalone instruction. Based on these findings, teachers are able to collaborate with classroom teachers to enhance instruction and language proficiency. We also turn-key information to teachers about using ENL methodologies in the classroom to ensure students are given consistent ENL support. TITLE III is a supplemental ELL program that is evaluated by the parents/guardians who attend. ENL pedagogues give a feedback form to families at the end of the program, this is truly helpful when planning for future sessions. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The interventions in place relate to student groupings and collaborative discussions amongst colleagues on how summative data impacts student learning. At P22Q, we also use streaming as a method of instruction. Students are placed into classrooms based on their learning levels and data outcomes. These interventions give students the instruction and support they need in order to reach their IEP goals, while enhancing language proficiency. We are constantly revisiting assessments in order to have a clear perspective of our students’ progress/challenges in all academic settings. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In order to meet the academic needs of our diverse students, we use streaming. Students are grouped based on literacy and math levels. This allows teachers to target specific areas of development for each student and provide instruction based on students’ needs. We also use academic intervention services. Using AIS, students’ needs are determined and targeted strategies are put into place. Progress is monitored on an ongoing basis to determine the success of the strategies on student achievement. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Each year, the ENL pedagogues review an ATS report called the RLAT. The RLAT is a report that provides us with the NYSESLAT results. We also utilize the RNMR which provides us detailed information regarding the scores in each modality. The RLAT provides teachers with student scores in all four modalities: listening, reading, speaking and writing. It is important to recognize that the majority of our ELLs are cognitively challenged therefore they tend to only attain a beginner level. In lower grades k-2, standardized assessment ELLs have stronger basic interpersonal communication skills than cognitive academic language skills. They are able to converse and perform well in speaking and listening but perform significantly below level in their reading and writing ability. As per instructional data, progress was noted for most students in speaking and listening, while reading and writing skills are still an area of weakness for the majority of our students. There are 29 entering students, 37 emerging students, 18 transitioning students, 6 expanding students and 2 commanding. Based on these results, this year, we would like our instructional focus to target reading and writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Each year, pedagogues across P224Q are given the NYSESLAT scores of their ENL students. In collaboration, we encourage teachers to use ENL methodologies within each lesson. Through this, pedagogues create IEP goals in order to continue supporting student language development. With this information, the ENL and classroom teachers will work together to meet the academic and language needs of each student. The purpose of this collaboration is to ensure that each student is receiving instruction tailored to their needs with hope to increase NYSESLAT scores 0  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Based on CR Part 154 , ENL teachers will create servicing schedules based on the specific mandates. Integrated service will give ENL teachers the opportunity to continue collaboration with classroom teachers to provide comprehensive instruction aligned to the CCLS. Integrated instruction will take place in the students' homeroom. Standalone will take place in the ENL rooms provided at each site. Standalone will provide students an opportunity to have small group and/or one-on-one instruction to reach the specific ENL/ IEP goals provided for the school year. Homogeneous, heterogeneous, and different cultural backgrounds will be present in both settings of Integrated and Standalone instruction. At P224Q we always create our student groups based on CR-PART-154 mandates ( proficiency levels, age appropriate groupings, home-room classes) b. TBE program. If applicable. At this time, based on student enrollment, we do not have enough students with bilingual mandates to offer this program. c. DL program. If applicable. At this time, we do not offer a Dual Language program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Based on the New York State CR Part 154 mandates, our ENL practitioners are aware that ELL students in grades K-8, at the beginning/entering and low intermediate/emerging proficiency levels require 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction. Beginners will have split service of 180 standalone minutes and 180 integrated minutes. Low Intermediates will have 90 minutes of standalone instruction and 180 minutes of integrated instruction. Transitioning intermediates will have 180 minutes, 90 integrated and 90 integrated OR standalone. They are also aware that students who have achieved the advanced/expanding level on the NYSESLAT, should receive 180 minutes of ELA instruction and 180 minutes of ENL integrated services, and those students who have scored at the proficient/commanding level will receive two years of transitional 90 min ENL services. In order to deliver the mandated ENL instructional minutes to our students, ENL teachers have maximized their groupings optimally based on class ratios. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our Freestanding ENL Program, we deliver content area instruction through thematic units, utilizing a variety of ENL approaches such as: TPR, LEA, the Natural Approach and CALLA. When planning instruction, modifications, scaffolding techniques and differentiated instruction are incorporated. This facilitates learning, and targets various learning styles in order to make content comprehensible and enrich language development. In order to support ELLs in accessing the common core, we provide scaffolds. Our goal is to provide ELLs with comprehensible concepts so they can easily and comfortably begin to use language within context. Then, we gradually pull back the supports to allow our students to become more independent in their own learning and language use. With the new CR-PART-154 mandates, the main core content will be present within collaboration as well. 1  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students at P.224Q with a Bilingual mandate are entitled to an Alternate Placement Para. Students with an AP Para are given support in their home languages. We ensure this by making sure each child with a bilingual mandate receives a AP Para in their classroom. Paras work with the ENL teachers to ensure that instruction and information is being relayed appropriately in the students native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status P224Q is a Special Education school that presently has 0 SIFE students. If we had a student with SIFE, the services available to this student include technology, community awareness, support of native language and culture, and a nurturing environment to facilitate language production. We also encourage a high level of parental involvement for SIFE students by engaging their parents in the school community. This is done through our large number of parent workshop offerings, our PTA meetings, TITLE III, and many other school events. The use of our Translation and Interpretation Unit also helps to reach out to these parents. These intensive services are offered to newcomers and long term ELLs. P224Q has 3 subgroups of ELLs. 1. Newcomers (students with less than 3 years of service) 2. Students with an Extension of Services ( students with 4-6 years of service) 3. Long term ELLs (students who have completed 6 years of service) . We provide these subgroups with extensive exposure to the English language in the 4 modalities using the ENL standards, NYSAA, and CCLS. We will target the five CORE reading elements: phonemic awareness, phonics, reading fluency, vocabulary and comprehension using scaffolding strategies during instruction to support newcomers. We will differentiate instruction using learning styles, multiple intelligences and Universal Design for Learning in order to provide multiple means of representation, action and expression, and engagement. We will provide opportunities for students to utilize CALLA learning strategies to enhance learner independence; we will use the students’ L1 native language to improve L2 comprehension, where relevant, via cognates. We will provide comprehensible input by using visuals, realia, concrete examples, TPR, and technology; we will tap into students’ background culture and knowledge to help make L1 to L2 connections and we will also provide learning experiences targeting the four language modalities: speaking, listening, reading and writing. For each ELL group being served, differentiation and scaffolding techniques are present. By connecting IEPs, student groupings, the CCLS, and ENL Lab-R results, each child has a differentiated learning experience. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? P224Q is a district 75 school. All of our ELL students are ELL-SWDs. In order to provide access to academic content and increase student language proficiency we have purchased Rigby: Activate Early Learning for grades K-3 and On Our Way to English for grades K-5. Many instructional and scaffolding strategies are targeted through each unit that also support cross curricular learning in Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies. We also have a technology based program called Reading A-Z that gives students the opportunity to read at school and home while the application tracks their progress. Parents and teachers also have access to this application. The programs target all four modalities and differentiate for the five language stages. For our students in grades 6-8, we utilize many Pearson and Longmann products. We utilize their low/beginning cultural readers that target seven knowledge areas and stimulates cross-cultural exchange. We also use Pearson and Longmann's Writing to Communicate books to help build vocabulary, focus on writing structure and the mechanics, and communication. Through ENL and classroom teacher collaboration, student needs in the content areas are discussed and interventions are then addressed by the ENL staff. The interventions most commonly are 1) explicitly teaching content area vocabulary using visuals 2) hands on activities 3) breaking down larger concepts into smaller more comprehensible components. (Integrated learning) P224Q system wide curriculum in the content areas (Math, Science and Social Studies) is also used by our ENL staff. We adapt the content area materials in order to support our ELL students' needs. Creative and flexible programming is used to allow ENL teachers the ability to collaboratively plan with classroom teachers and infuse ENL strategies into classroom instruction. Strategies include TPR, scaffolding techniques, creating visual cues, modifying instruction etc. Block ELA schedules are programmed mid morning to allow students to receive 90 minutes of whole language 2  instruction. Collaboration among ELL teachers and classroom teachers is maximized at this time -(As per our site CR-Part-154 instructional regulations.) As our school's student body consists of all students with disabilities, time spent with non disabled peers occurs through partnerships with mainstream principals and classroom teachers. Our students participate alongside their same age non-disabled peers during special activities and events whenever possible. Students in inclusion receive their services primarily in their general education classrooms where they spend the majority of their day. Their adaptations are made through collaboration between the mainstream teacher and the SETTS teacher who adapt materials and curricula accordingly. This allows for minimal pull out services thus maximizing times spent with non-disabled peers. Students who improve in all areas are re-evaluated and moved to the next LRE, whenever instructionally appropriate. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P. 224Q is committed to encouraging collaboration among the ENL staff, and classroom teachers in order to provide our subgroups of ELLs with intensive small group explicit, direct instruction. ELL interventions will be provided by certified ENL teachers during regular scheduled service times, using the integrated and standalone model. Instructional programs and materials presently used in our ENL program include: iPADs, Laptops, LeapFrog Language First Program for grades K-5 with Audio Support in six languages for families; Rigby Curriculum - Activate Early Learning and On Our Way to English with ELL Assessment Kit (aligned to TESOL Standards), NYSESLAT Test Preparation materials for grades K-8, RADIUS Audio Learning System by Learning Resources (targets content area concepts and vocabulary), Unique Learning Systems, Reading A-Z, Touch Math, Lakeshore's photo cards to build language, Word and Sentence Flip Books, Word Family Stamps and Teaching Cards (targets homophones, idioms and multiple meanings), music, puppets, ENL libraries, Amazing English by Addison Wesley, A Chorus of Cultures: Developing Literacy Through Multicultural Poetry, thematic teaching materials, graphic organizers, multicultural charts, and teacher-made adapted materials. These programs, materials and interventions are based on current researched based ENL methodologies. Finally, NYSESLAT test prep opportunities will continue to be implemented. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At P224Q, intervention services are provided in the English Language. At our school, we only offer Freestanding ENL services. Some of the resources used to intervene in specific areas include - For our Standardized students, we use the Go Math Curriculum, Brain Pop, Reading A-Z, Everyday Math & Treasures. For our AA students, we use Unique Learning Systems which is a thematic based curriculum that covers math, science, SS, & ELA for our NYSAA students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Presently, we will continue our programs , however, new programs are being considered for the upcoming school year. We will continuously analyze student demographics across sites to create self contained ENL and bilingual classes when possible. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued this year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All of P224Q's programs are offered to all students regardless of ELL status. Program participation is based on ability and appropriateness in meeting a student's overall goals. Academic, social, and emotional factors are taken into consideration. ELL students are offered the same opportunities in these types of curricular activities as their English speaking peers. Examples of some of these programs are: Broadway Theatre, Mainsite Plays & events, Basketball Tournaments, Get Ready to Learn. Programs offered vary from year to year. We invite all students to participate based on functional ability and parental permission. Written correspondence is translated for our ELL parents. ELLs participation in these activites is in direct proportion with participation by their non-ELL peers. At the current time, P224Q does not have after school extra-curricular activities. However, along with the previously named programs, our ELLs receive additional supplemental services through our Title III Program, based on funding. This year, with our Title III funding, we will be offering our students and their families 3  four Saturday sessions. During these sessions, students, teachers and parents were given techniques and programs to improve their children's language acquisition. They also had the opportunity to learn about dance in different cultures. These programs are ELL specific. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials presently used in our ENL program include: iPADs, Alternative Augmentative Communication Devices (AAC), Promethean Boards, Laptops, Rigby Curriculum - Activate Early Learning and On Our Way to English with ELL Assessment Kit (aligned to TESOL Standards), Unique Learning Systems, Attanasio & Attanasio/NYSESLAT Test Preparation materials for grades K-8, RADIUS Audio Learning System by Learning Resources (targets content area concepts and vocabulary), Lakeshore's photo cards to build language, Word and Sentence Flip Books, Reading A-Z, RAZ Kids, Word Family Stamps and Teaching Cards (targets homophones, idioms and multiple meanings), ENL libraries, Amazing English by Addison Wesley thematic teaching materials, graphic organizers, multicultural charts, and teacher-made adapted materials. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our school does not presently have a TBE program that targets Native Language Arts, however our ENL teachers deliver native language support through NLA libraries, dictionaries, and use of bilingual paraprofessionals in the school. Native language culture is valued in a variety of ways. To support native language, instructors enhance their vocabulary for foreign languages whenever possible, plan multicultural events and continue cultural explorations. Teachers may also group students of the same native language for certain activities and tasks with hope that the students can serve as a guide for one another, academically and socially. For those students with formal education in their native language, instruction will be offered with the understanding that a basic education has already been established. Therefore, we will concentrate initially making connections between native and English language instructions. Although at P224Q we only offer ENL, some of our students have a bilingual mandate. To ensure home language support, each student has an Alternate Placement Para to assist them with their language needs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ENL teachers provide instruction using ENL methodologies aligned to the CCLS ensuring all student work is grade and age appropriate. Teachers also collaborate with other classroom teachers and service providers to apply IEP mandated adaptations and modifications to specific instruction. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Since our school is a co-location, we are continually communicating with the main site staff to ensure that the needs of our ELLs' are being met. Our schools share use of the gym, library and cafeteria and we coordinate our schedules accordingly to avoid any conflicts. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At P224Q newly enrolled ELLs and those enrolled throughout the school year are encouraged to participate in the Chapter 683 summer program where they will receive ENL instruction. (This only applies to a student newly enrolled before the school year begins.) We also host a carnival at our PS 710 site for new families entering P224Q before the school year to assist students and families in becoming well versed and comfortable in their new school environment. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives are offered to our middle school students. Presently, Spanish is the language offered. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 4  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Title III, Monday Professional Development Sessions, District offered PD's. This year as per CR-PART-154 schools are asked to have 15% ELL based PD's. Mrs. Jessica Milillo & Ms. Nikki Maldonado will present this year on specific ELL topics that will help our administration and staff become aware of the major changes (CR-PART-154 and how it will impact their students,) as well as give them insight about how to better accommodate ELLs in their classrooms ( Translation/ Interpretation services/collaboration/minutes/SIFE/Cultures etc). Topics include best practices of co-teaching, cultural awareness, scheduling and mandates, language acquisition and alignment with core content area instruction, how to incorporate ENL strategies/methodologies in instruction. Teachers work with the literacy coach, Mary Joyce, to discuss how to implement ENL methodologies within ELA instruction. PD's are given by the coaches turn-keying and relaying information to teachers about how to implement ELA strategies in the classroom. The ENL teachers work with the coaches to produce content based professional developments guiding teachers in learning how to incorporate ENL into ELA in order to best support each learner in their classroom. Both coaches support our programs by giving us information on how to utilize assessments, and different school based Curriculums. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional development provided for our staff in curriculum, computer technology, literacy and language development have resulted in effective instruction for our ELL students. The collaboration between classroom and ENL staff is imperative for student success. Classroom teachers provide content area instruction using ENL techniques and methodologies with support from our ENL staff in both integrated and standalone settings. This year we will provide the following training: • Training in Language Experience Approach, the Natural Approach, TPR, the integration of the Arts and use of multi-cultural literature with ENL instruction* How to utilize the Translation/Interpretation Unit* Cultural Awareness/different cultures in your classroom - how this can impact student learning• Training in CALLA learning strategies required to develop Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP) in ELL students• How ELLs Access the Common Core• Workshops on scaffolding strategies to target critical thinking skills• On-Going Jose P. training to ensure all SPED Teachers meet 10 hour requirement• Turn-key training based on the ENL District, UFT and University workshops• Opportunities for classroom and ENL teachers to collaborate on units of study/CCLS* Ongoing development of the Alternate assessment curriculum K-8* Process of identifying ELL's / Scheduling / Mandates / CR-PART-154 We will continue to provide time for collaborative planning among classroom teachers, ENL teachers, and related service providers in order to enhance instruction for all ELL students. This will be conducted during common planning times and in inquiry sessions. In order to support ENL staff, opportunities to attend training is provided to them to develop strategies and ideas to assist with student and teacher development. Teachers who require 10 hours of Jose P. instruction are directed to register for professional development training sessions offered by District 75 ELL Department. ENL teachers will provide in school trainings to turn-key information obtained at District meetings. Each professional development session encompasses a focus on ENL relevance and accompanying suggested strategies for each population. ENL teachers plan common meetings with teachers of ELLs to assist them in providing content area instruction using ENL techniques and methodology. All staff including all related service providers, paraprofessionals and administrators 5  are encouraged to avail themselves of ELL training offered by D75 and New York City. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our annual meetings are given during the student IEP meetings. For an annual individual meeting, P224Q provides parents/families the opportunity to meet on other occasions throughout the school year to discuss their childs' progress as a learner. With proper scheduling, parents are invited to come to school to meet with teachers during the allotted time for parent outreach each Tuesday. When aware of a parent arriving, teachers will previously arrange interpretation and translation services to be part of the meeting. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Title III, Parent Workshops, Welcome Breakfast, PTA Meetings, Parent teacher conferences, Family Carnival, Parent orientation, IEP meetings. Parents are encouraged to attend these events through translated letters in their home languages, newsletters and the P224 website, which is also available for translation. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Desmond Park, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P224Q School DBN: D75 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mr. Desmond Park Title Principal Mrs. Jamie Allen Zic Assistant Principal Susan Gelman Parent Coordinator J.Milillo/ N.Maldonado/ENL ENL/Bilingual Teacher Juliet Iadanza Parent Ms. Elsa Myer/Teacher Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Mary Joyce N/A Mr. Lerro Ketler Loussaint N/A NA NA NA Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/26/17 6/26/17 NA 6/26/17 6/26/17 6/26/17 6/26/17 6/26/17 6/26/17 6/26/17 6/26/17 6/26/17 6/26/17 6/26/17 6/26/17 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75Q224 School Name: P.224Q Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Gelman (*Primary) Susan Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Parent Coordinator/LAC No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian 1 .35 1 .35 9  Bengali Chinese (any) Gujarati Haitian Creole Korean Mandarin English Russian Slovak Spanish 3 12 2 1 3 0 228 4 0 33 1.05 4.18 .7 .35 1.05 0 79.44 1.39 0 11.5 3 10 2 1 3 2 228 3 1 33 1.05 3.48 .7 .35 1.05 0.7 79.44 1.05 .35 11.5 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 0 % Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Parent /Student language cards Parent Handbook Title III September / given to new admits upon arrival at P.224Q September / given to new admits upon arrival at P.224Q Parent teacher conference/ parent breakfast notices September, November, March, May How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Online translation through E-chalk - all parents are given a link to the P.224Q website. Parents are given a tutorial by a teacher and administrator using a computer to learn how to navigate the website in their preferred language / all fliers and documents related to the program and translated using Google docs and sent home to families in their native language. If oral communication is necessary, pedagogues and paras will make phone calls in the families preferred language. Information translated on the school website. Fliers include a link to the website so parents may view the same 0  documentation but in their preferred language. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide IEP meetings Parent Teacher Conferences Parent Orientations PTA meetings interpretation service(s)? Interpretation phone line provided by the DOE. Pedgogogues, Paraprofessionals, Interpretation phone line provided by the DOE Pedagogues, Paraprofessionals 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Any emergencies that take place at P.224Q will be listed immediately on the schools website. Families with students at P.224Q are made aware of the school website and how to navigate the forum in their preferred language. Families are made aware of this option during school orientation, the parent handbook, and at IEP meetings. Should a family be unable to access Internet, bilingual school personnel will make phone calls to families, if a language is not available on site, the interpretation line may be used to help relay any important messages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 1  All parents will receive a parent handbook. Within this handbook are guidelines on how to retrieve specified information using the school website. All information on the website may be translated in the families preferred language. In our parent handbook, we state and discuss the importance of the families right to receive information in their native tongue. This information will also be reiterated at the parent breakfast / orientations. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2 
