 School Name: 30Q234 P.S. 234 Principal: DORA DANNER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: P.S. 234 The School of Performing Arts & Technology 343000010234 Pre K – 5 School Number (DBN): 30Q234 30-15 29 th Street Astoria N.Y. 11102 718-956-2760 718-956-2765 Phone Number: Fax: Peggy Mouzakitis Ppapath@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 30 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Dora Danner Sonya Gimondo Claire Wright & Rebecca Staley Carmela Riconda TheaScott N/A N/A District Information Dr. Philip A.Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North Long Island City, NY 11101 pcompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-391-6147 Phone Number: 718-391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   North Queens Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North North Long Island City, NY 11101 lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dora Danner Sonya Gimondo Rebecca Staley N/A TheaScott N/A N/A N/A Carmela Riconda *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ PTA President Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Peggy Mouzakitis BlerinaKotsis Jason Weinberger Tammie Grant VioletaVillatoro Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Paraprofessional Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Paraprofessional Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our school’s mission statement reflects our commitment to extending our students’ life and academic experiences to reflect the influence of cultures and communities, as well as our efforts to immerse our students into the real world, as indicated below:   “The premise with which we will work is, ‘A school is four walls with tomorrow inside.’ Children come to school with a natural curiosity to explore and a desire to learn. Nurturing this desire and guiding it to flourish in the garden of learning can only be accomplished when the teacher nourishes that desire with experiences from all domains of learning. The school will feed this natural curiosity and will rely on the continuous support of the home to encourage emotional and academic growth. The school, home, and community are partners in the process of preparing children for positive, productive, and creative futures.” Our school’s core beliefs derived from looking at our school wide data and needs and essential questions were developed as a focus for all PLCs and lesson plan development. The following are our core beliefs: 1. Providing effective/actionable feedback to drive student awareness and student initiated academic accountability. 2. All students should be engaged in rigorous curricula across the content areas. 3. All students should have access to rigorous learning objectives and tasks. 4. To bring the arts back in order to support a well-rounded education for all students. Through the arts we are fostering equal access to learning opportunities for all learning styles so that students who do not feel proficient in traditional academic subjects across the curriculum can gain social and emotional support through the lens of performing arts. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 234 The School of Performing Arts and Technology is located in the culturally diverse community of Astoria. Our student body hails from various countries that span the globe. All of our learners’ instructional needs are met through lessons that accommodate different learning styles across all content areas. We utilize data to drive our instructional decisions for the entire student body. Our instruction is enhanced by the infusion of performing arts and technology, in order to foster student engagement and subsequent success in meeting the Common Core Learning Standards. Our instructional vision has led to the development of new after school programs this year such as, SOAR to Success for our bottom third students, Succeed Literacy Academy for our students who are approaching the standards, and PERFORM, which includes dance, theatre, music, art, technology, and sports. We continue to purchase and modify programs to support our instructional vision focusing on the development of literacy, math, and foundational skills. These programs include Fundations, Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project Units, balanced literacy libraries, supplemental science/social studies resources, designated science labs, LAKESHORE Learning stations, i-Ready, MyOn and Mathletics. Partnerships with many community based organizations have been established to help support our school wide vision of the enhancement of the school: Spoons Across America, Dance Theatre of Harlem, City Lore, Asphalt Green, New York Cares, Creative Arts Team, New York City Ballet Nutcracker Project, Carnegie Hall Project, Ballet Tech, Robotics, Cooking Matters, City Harvest, Brighter Bites, Alvin Ailey Dance Project and Inside Broadway. In addition, we currently have art residencies in grades K-5. We continue to maintain our new Parent Resource Room on the first floor of the building to provide parents with their own space in our school community. Through our collaboration with Zone 126 we have provided families with Adult ESL Classes, cooking classes, dance classes, and workshops facilitated by community organizations and staff members. Other ongoing school community events include Movie Nights, Talent and Art Showcase, Alvin Ailey Family Night, Field Day, Culture Day, and numerous performances and assemblies. 0  In harmony with the Advanced Literacy initiative, our Advance Literacy Team has continued to plan professional learning cycles to support our curriculum development and growth in professional practice. These learning cycles began on the 2017 Chancellor’s Conference Day and will continue through the 2018-2019 school year. Our topics will include, but are not limited to: classroom and professional school-wide protocols such as debate, questioning and discussion, and text-based protocols; effective unit planning; three tiered vocabulary; component and composite skills; inclusion of UDL for ENL and special needs learners; ICT teaching models; assessment and the use of meaningful data. The goal of the professional development workshops is to learn and implement strategies to move the students towards proficiency and success in all content areas. Our Principal, Assistant Principals, and lead teachers on each grade will continue to attend professional learning opportunities and turn-key new strategies for implementation to the staff, as well. Our Administrators, Teachers, School Leadership Team, P.T.A., and Parent Coordinator provide monthly workshops and other parent activities to increase parent involvement and deepen their understanding of ways to increase their child’s academic performance and meet their social emotional needs. We will continue to invite families into classrooms for monthly publishing celebrations, craft workshops, multi-cultural festivals, Poetry Cafés, and performance assemblies. Furthermore, workshops provided by the parent coordinator and staff members inform parents of ways to collaborate with teachers to enhance their child’s education via informational presentations on test preparations, Dolch Sight Word Expectations, ELL Strategies in the Home, Healthy Habits for Your Family, Internet Safety, etc. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have a varied student population consisting of general education students, English Language Learners, and Students with Disabilities. Based on data driven goals, each of our students receive targeted instruction tailored to their specific needs. As a school that houses both ENL and ICT classes on each grade, we have a strong focus on allowing all learners shared access to the curriculum. Our School Based Support Team supports teachers in moving at-risk students through the RtI three tiered process, ensuring our efforts are focused on each student’s individual needs to promote success for all learners. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Trust Increased level of family engagement events Increased level of parent comfort with communicated concerns and desires    Growth in weekly staff collaboration  Stronger staff engagement and voice in professional learning communities Effective School Leadership  Greater opportunity for teacher leader roles with grade leader representative on every grade, teacher members on all committees, teacher-led professional learning opportunities/communities, etc.  Development of daily opportunities for collaboration amongst team members (daily common preps)  All teacher practice observations met with one to one feedback sessions  Administration calibrates a shared understanding of the Danielson’s Framework for Teaching and includes actionable feedback and resources in feedback sessions Strong Family-Community Ties.  Learning leaders and parent volunteers are present and engaged throughout our school community, both inside and outside the classroom. 1   Vitally active PTA contributes to our community by conducting fundraisers and events that have encouraged involvement by all of our stake-holders.  Our school newsletter includes family team members.  "Selfie Awareness" and Anti-Bullying Campaigns, which include the participation of parent volunteers who contribute time and resources to capture our events as shown in photographs and framed posters displayed throughout our hallways.  Active Parent Resource Room in which parents volunteer to conduct workshops for our community families, along with our parent coordinator and staff members Interactive school website, co-managed by parents  Parent computer lab and lending libraries including books in many languages   ESL classes open to our parents, as well as outside community members  Strong relationships with local businesses who donate goods and services to support fundraisers and events for the school.  Our guidance department provides resources and support for our families Supportive Environment Student-Teacher lunches  Anti-bullying and “Selfie Awareness” campaigns   Teacher selected classroom library purchase  Teacher selected supply closet re-stock  Classroom coverage for additional team collaboration Rigorous Instruction Implementation of science labs across all grades Implementation of the Teacher's College Reading Project Units of Study   Alignment of the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project Units of Study   Modifying curriculum with Advanced Literacy focus Increased small group instruction   Data team analysis of school data  CCLS team learning round feedback Collaborative Teachers  Weekly common planning  Grade-wide field trips  Grade-wide assemblies Student Achievement  No recommended hold-over students  Only 4 students required Tier III instruction across the school-year  NYC Performance Tasks and Fountas & Pinnell running record data shows significant student improvement from baseline diagnostic to end of year diagnostic Areas of Focus:   Looking closely at June instructional reports in Math, as well as item analysis reports to determine specific topics/standards that need to be addressed further according to the data and trends. Looking closely at June instructional reports in ELA, as well as item analysis reports to create in depth plans focusing on vocabulary and oral language. 2  3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q234 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 522 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 51 51 19 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 19 18 17 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 77.2% % Reduced Lunch 17.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 38.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 30.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.08 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 59.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 93% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 36 34 19 94.7% 5.0% 16.1% 6.5% 23.4% 1.7% 4 3% 8.8 58.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A NO N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Daily common preps are scheduled for teachers to design thematic units and use data effectively to plan for small groups and differentiate instruction. This ensures rigorous instruction through the collaborative team approach. Through ongoing planning sessions with parent, administration, and school staff, and through data received from PPO feedback and Parent/Teacher Surveys, school goals are refined and focus on oral language development and the writing process; support strategies for ENL students and SWDs; balanced literacy inclusion in all core areas of study. Supports provided to enhance rigorous instruction are: MyOn, i-Ready, Mathletics, balanced literacy libraries, oral language resources, literacy center resources, and after school programs. All instructional programs have been aligned to CCLS, CEP, and school-wide expectations. In the 2017-2018 school year our data trends show, 3 students were recommended to be held-over. Only 4 students required Tier III instruction across the school-year. 2. Through learning rounds conducted by the CCLS Team, unit plan reviews conducted by the Advanced Literacy Team, and data analysis conducted by the Data Team, and from PPO feedback the following trends were identified in the 2017-18 school year and will be monitored for progress in the 2018-19 school year:  Curriculum modification to include the 1st four hallmarks of Advanced Literacy  Stronger reading and writing curriculum using the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project Units of study, and including correlation with content area themes/genres Strengthen development of:  o Writing curriculum to include a deeper focus on:  Responding to reading  Conventions  Academic vocabulary usage Stronger evidence of writing process   Genre specific elements and devices o Word Study/Component Skills  Three tiered of vocabulary  Morphological awareness  Syntax usage o Classroom Protocols Socratic Circles   Debate   Questioning and Discussion Routines Interview 5   Text-based o Work with a variety of texts  Big ideas and rich content  Tackle unit concepts from multiple perspectives   Build background knowledge Include multiple genres and media types Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all classes in grades K through 5 will have fully implemented the Teacher's College reading program. 95% of students in grades K-5 will show at least two levels of growth in reading as measured by Fountas and Pinnell reading level benchmarks and one level in writing as measured by teacher created rubrics. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Evidence based instructional programs:  Implementation of the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project Units across all grades o Strengthen development of:  Writing curriculum to include a deeper focus on: Grades K – 5 students and teachers, with a focus on K-2 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Advanced Literacy Core Team Grade Teams  Responding to reading  Conventions  Academic vocabulary usage Stronger evidence of writing  process  Genre specific elements and devices  Grade and genre specific rubric development including CCLS aligned indicators  Word Study/Component Skills  Three tiered of vocabulary  Morphological awareness  Syntax usage  Classroom Protocols Socratic Circles   Debate   Questioning and Discussion Interview Routines  Text-based  Work with a variety of texts  Big ideas and rich content  Tackle unit concepts from  multiple perspectives Include multiple genres and media types  Build background knowledge Professional Development: Grade K-5 Teachers Sept 2018-June2019 Advance Literacy Team 7  Our Advanced Literacy Team will provide ongoing learning cycles on Monday afternoons throughout the school year to specifically target the areas of focus stated in our Needs Assessment. Systems and structures needed to impact change:    School leaders will ensure that sufficient planning time is provided to implement the necessary modifications to the curriculum, and teams will participate in planning sessions to ensure alignment. School leaders will ensure that sufficient time is provided to the Advanced Literacy Team to plan for school wide learning cycles and curriculum development progress monitoring. School leaders will ensure that sufficient time is provided to the CCLS and Data teams to evaluate classroom practice; curriculum development; and data trends, and provide actionable feedback to grade teams.  Grade teams will meet weekly during any of their five scheduled common preparation periods to continue work on meeting CEP goals. All Students K – 5 Sept2018-June 2019 CCLS Team Data Team Administration Advanced Literacy Team CCLS Team Data Team Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities; of English language learners; and high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ELL, SWD, and other student subgroups Sept 2018-June 2019  Service providers (i.e.: ENL, SETTS, IEP, SE, etc.) will collaborate with grade teams to correlate instructional support and interventions.  Professional development learning cycles to include ENL Classroom teachers and SWD strategies/supports, as well as ICT teaching model components Advanced Literacy Team ENL, SETTS, IEP service providers Teams share completed work via PS234 Google Drive in grade specific folders. Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teacher Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 8  Across the 2018-19 school year administrators, teachers, and the parent coordinator will provide the following:  Active Parent Resource Room, in which our parent coordinator and staff members will conduct informational workshops to support family understanding of the shifts in curriculum.  Weekly after school workshops for families  Teacher created monthly newsletters and calendars for families  Website  Access to web-based programs, such as: MyOn, Mathletics, i-Ready, etc.   Lending libraries in active Parent Resource Room, in which a variety of texts will be made available to parents Invitations to district-wide parent workshops on extending student learning in the home Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Five scheduled preparation period to allow for grade teams to meet collaboratively   Curricular materials and resources to support modification of curriculum  Materials for parent workshops  Professional texts and resources for PLCs  Maximizing per session and per diem allotment for planning, curriculum development, data analysis, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of students with a focus on K-5, will have progressed one level in reading as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment and shown progress toward moving one level in writing as measured by the CCLS aligned indicators on teacher created rubrics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessments and Teacher Created CCLS Aligned Writing Rubrics Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. Strengths  Anti-bullying & “Selfie Awareness” campaigns o Winter of 2018: Parents, students, and staff participated in a school-wide campaign to spread the message of self-confidence and kindness to others, including the participation of parent volunteers who contributed time and resources to capture our events as shown in photographs and framed posters displayed throughout our hallways.  Student-Teacher lunches o 2017-2018 school year: Teachers rewarded good choices by selecting student groups to have lunch with the teacher  Teacher selected classroom library purchase o Spring of 2018: Budgetary funds were allotted to grade teams, who then selected unit of study aligned balanced literacy libraries  Teacher selected supply closet re-stock o Spring of 2018: Budgetary funds were allotted to purchase teacher requested classroom supplies  Classroom coverage for additional team collaboration o June of 2018: Chancellor's Conference Day was devoted to planning for the 2018-2019 school year curriculum 2. Priority needs based on MOSL data, PPO feedback, NYSESLAT and State Exams: Throughout the 2018-19 school year, the administration will ensure that funds are available to provide coverage for teachers to allow for sufficient planning time to accomplish the following: Implement the necessary modifications to the curriculum   The Advanced Literacy Team to plan for school wide learning cycles and curriculum development progress monitoring.  The CCLS /Data teams evaluate classroom practice; curriculum development; and data trends, and provide actionable feedback to grade teams. In addition, the administration will ensure that program schedules will allow for five scheduled common preparation periods, during which grade teams will meet weekly to continue work on meeting CEP goals. 0  In order to create an environment for students to feel supported and feel safe when challenged by their teachers and peers, teachers will embed strategies and protocols to build strong routines which will boost confidence while improving student progress in both oral language and writing.  Student progress should be measured using grade and genre specific rubric development including CCLS aligned indicators. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students in kindergarten through 5th grade will have the opportunity to participate in a variety of discussion protocols, with support when necessary, as evidenced by MOTP observations. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instruction: Sept 2018-June 2019 Advanced Literacy Core Team Grade Teams Development of exemplar units of study to support grade teams in modification of curriculum to include: Grades K – 5 teachers and students  Strengthen development of: o Writing curriculum to include a deeper focus on:  Responding to reading  Conventions  Academic vocabulary usage Stronger evidence of writing process   Genre specific elements and devices  Grade and genre specific rubric development including CCLS aligned indicators o Word Study/Component Skills  Three tiered of vocabulary  Morphological awareness  Syntax usage o Classroom Protocols Socratic Circles   Debate   Questioning and Discussion Routines  Text-based Interview o Work with a variety of texts  big ideas and rich content  tackle unit concepts from multiple perspectives include multiple genres and media types   build background knowledge Professional Development: Sept 2018-June 2019 Our Advanced Literacy Team will provide ongoing learning cycles on Monday afternoons throughout the school year to specifically target the areas of focus stated in our Needs Assessment, as evaluated by the CCLS, Data, and Advanced Literacy Teams. Grades K-5 Teachers Advance Literacy Team 2 CCLS Team Data Team Administration Advanced Literacy Team CCLS Team Data Team ENL Teachers and ENL Coordinator Teachers of Students with Special Needs Sept 2018-June 2019 Advanced Literacy Team ENL, SETTS, IEP service providers Systems and structures needed to impact change: Grades K-5 Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019    School leaders will ensure that sufficient planning time is provided to implement the necessary modifications to the curriculum, and teams will participate in planning sessions to ensure alignment. School leaders will ensure that sufficient time is provided to the Advanced Literacy Team to plan for school wide learning cycles and curriculum development progress monitoring. School leaders will ensure that sufficient time is provided to the CCLS and Data teams to evaluate classroom practice; curriculum development; and data trends, and provide actionable feedback to grade teams.  Grade teams will meet weekly during any of their five scheduled common preparation periods to continue work on meeting CEP goals. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities; of ENLs; and high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Service providers (i.e.: ENL, SETTS, IEP, SE, etc.) will collaborate with grade teams to correlate instructional support and interventions.  Professional development learning cycles to include ENL, SWD, and ICT Teaching Model components. Examples, but not limited to:  Vocabulary and language development, through which teachers introduce new concepts by discussing key vocabulary words and plan multiple, systematic exposures to build students’ conceptual awareness  Explicit instruction, or direct teaching of concepts, academic language, and reading comprehension strategies needed to complete classroom tasks and modeling  Graphic organizers, and visuals including pictures, diagrams, and charts to help all students easily recognize essential information and its relationship to supporting ideas. 3  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Across the 2018-19 school year administrators, teachers, and the parent coordinator will provide the following:  Active Parent Resource Room, in which our parent coordinator and staff members will conduct informational workshops to parents  Weekly family workshops  Teacher created monthly newsletters and calendars for families  Website  Access to web-based programs, such as: MyOn, Mathletics, i-Ready, etc.   Lending libraries in active Parent Resource Room, in which a variety of texts will be made available to parents Invitations to district-wide parent workshops on extending student learning in the home Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Five scheduled preparation period to allow for grade teams to meet collaboratively ● Curricular materials and resources to support modification of curriculum ● Materials for parent workshops ● Professional texts and resources for PLCs ● Maximizing per session and per diem allotment for planning, curriculum development, data analysis, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all students in kindergarten through 5th grade will display improvement in the use of discussion protocols by participating in oral and written communication in a variety of topics and genres, as measured by growth toward 1 rubric level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Measured by the indicators of teacher created rubrics in oral presentations and published works. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  1. Strengths:  Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and school as evidenced in  The Parent and Teacher Surveys, PPO feedback and the development and effective maintenance of the variety of committees and teacher teams that meet regularly throughout the year. These teams include, but are not limited to Grade Leader Committee, New Teacher Induction Committee, Data Committee, CCLS Committee, Advanced Literacy Core Team, Professional Learning Committee, CEP Team. Staff has participated in monthly Literacy and Mathematics Liaison meetings led by coaches and school teachers from schools across the district. At these meetings successful practices are shared and discussed with participants. Discussions have centered on teacher strategies and curriculum supports in vocabulary for SWDs and ENLs. Lead teachers have been sent to cycles of professional learning offerings provided by the field support center.   Teachers have also opened up their classrooms to showcase their strengths and knowledge within a specific area through learning rounds.  Paraprofessional have been included in academic professional learning sessions so they can assist in supporting/teaching small groups of students during instruction.  Through the collaborative teacher model, teachers have actively been involved in shared leadership through the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement as evidenced by teachers’ opportunities to lead Monday PLO’S where they plan and choose professional learning sessions that best fit their needs. Teachers have an active role and stake in the school community as established by the school foci.  2. Needs evidenced by State Exam data and analysis reports:  Across the 2018-19 school year collaborative teams should include roles and responsibilities, which are accountable as evidenced by contributions made by each team member.  Enhance/modify curriculum across all study areas including: ELA, mathematics, science, and social studies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students in grades K through 5 will engage in activities that support and develop their social emotional well being and their cultural responsiveness, as evidenced by a beginning, middle and end of year survey. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Evidence based instructional programs: Grades K – 5 Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 School Based Support Team  Development of exemplar units of study to support grade teams in modification of curriculum to include: Sanford Harmony Social Emotional Learning Program   Video presentations, digital media  Read alouds  Role playing exercises  Written responses  Discussions and conversations  Morning meeting protocols  Respect for All campaign in February, 2019  Team building activities  Guidance counselor talks  Establishment of safe spaces in classrooms Grade Teams Professional Development: Grades K-5 Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 School Based Support Team Our school based support team will provide ongoing learning cycles throughout the school year to specifically target the areas of focus stated in our Needs Assessment, as evaluated by the results of the surveys. Systems and structures needed to impact change: Grades K-5 Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019    School leaders will ensure that sufficient planning time is provided to implement the necessary modifications to the curriculum, and teams will participate in planning sessions to ensure alignment. School leaders will ensure that sufficient time is provided to the SBST to plan for school wide learning cycles and curriculum development progress monitoring. School leaders will ensure that sufficient time is provided to the CCLS/Data teams to evaluate classroom practice; curriculum development; and data trends, and provide actionable feedback to grade teams. CCLS/Data Team Administration SBST PPT CCLS/Data Teams 7 ELL Teachers and ELL Coordinator Sept 2018-June 2019 ENL, SETTS, IEP service providers Teachers of Students with Special Needs  Grade teams will meet weekly during any of their five scheduled common preparation periods to continue work on meeting CEP goals. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities; of English language learners; and high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Service providers (i.e.: ENL, SETTS, IEP, SE, etc.) will collaborate with grade teams to correlate instructional support and interventions.  Professional development learning cycles to include ENL, SWD, and ICT Teaching Model components. Examples, but not limited to: Ø Vocabulary and language development, through which teachers introduce new concepts by discussing key vocabulary words and plan multiple, systematic exposures to build students’ conceptual awareness Ø Explicit instruction, or direct teaching of concepts, academic language, and reading comprehension strategies needed to complete classroom tasks and modeling Ø Graphic organizers, and visuals including pictures, diagrams, and charts to help all students easily recognize essential information and its relationship to supporting ideas. Teams share completed work via PS234 Google Drive in grade specific folders. Grades K-5 Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teacher Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Across the 2018-19 school year administrators, teachers, and the parent coordinator will provide the following:  Active Parent Resource Room, in which our parent coordinator and staff members will conduct informational workshops to support family understanding of the shifts in curriculum.  Weekly family workshops  Teacher created monthly newsletters and calendars for families  Website  Access to Sanford Harmony program   Lending libraries in active Parent Resource Room, in which a variety of texts will be made available to parents Invitations to district-wide parent workshops on extending student learning in the home Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Five scheduled preparation period to allow for grade teams to meet collaboratively ● Curricular materials and resources to support modification of curriculum ● Materials for parent workshops ● Professional texts and resources for PLCs ● Maximizing per session and per diem allotment for planning, curriculum development, data analysis, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of grade teams will have participated in completing and reviewing social/emotional and cultural responsiveness surveys. 100% of students will have filled out beginning and middle of year surveys. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Measured using social/emotional and cultural responsiveness survey data results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths Effective School Leadership  Greater opportunity for teacher leader roles with grade leader representative on every grade, teacher members on all committees, teacher-led professional learning opportunities/communities, etc.  Development of daily opportunities for collaboration amongst team members (daily common preps)  Provides coverage to enable teachers to collaborate in addition to common preps, multiple times per year  All teacher practice observations met with one to one feedback sessions  Administration calibrates a shared understanding of the Danielson’s Framework for Teaching and includes actionable feedback and resources in feedback sessions  Establishes and discusses best practice strategies for all learners are discussed in IPCs and other conferences between administrators and teachers. 2. Need (s) focus as evidenced by Math State Exam data and analysis reports/June Instructional Reports  Cycles of Mathematics professional development based on Measure of Teacher Practice observations and IPCs: o a stronger use of questioning and discussion within mathematics o More prevalent use of manipulatives and scaffolds within mathematics o On-going daily formative assessment routines to inform scaffold/support needs for all students Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students in kindergarten through 5th grade will show one level proficiency with solving multi-step word problems between pre- and post topic assessments, as evidenced by the Exemplars Library tasks and rubrics. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Evidence-based instructional programs Grades K-5 Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Grades K-5 Teachers  Regular use of Go Math! Think Central web-based resource  Access to/use of manipulatives included in curriculum plans  Questioning/Discussion based protocols infused into unit/lesson plans  On-going daily formative assessment routines to inform scaffold/support needs for all students  Exemplar Library online resources Grades K-5 Students Administration Professional Development Grades K-5 Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 CCLS/Data Team  Our CCLS/Data teams will provide cycles of PLOs throughout the school year to specifically target the areas of focus stated in our Needs Assessment. Systems and structures needed to impact change: Grades K-5 Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Grades K-5 Teachers   School leaders will ensure that sufficient planning time is provided to implement the necessary modifications to the curriculum, and teams will participate in planning sessions to ensure alignment. School leaders will ensure that sufficient time is provided to the CCLS/Data teams to plan for school wide learning cycles and curriculum development progress monitoring.  Grade teams will meet weekly during any of their five scheduled common preparation periods to continue work on meeting CEP goals. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities; of English language learners; and high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ELL, SWD, and other student subgroups Sept 2018- June 2019 ENL and Special Education Teachers and Service Providers 1  Service providers (i.e.: ENL, SETTS, IEP, SE, etc.) will collaborate with grade teams to correlate instructional support and interventions.  Professional development learning cycles to include ENL, SWD, and ICT Teaching Model components Classroom teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Across the 2018-19 school year administrators, teachers, and the parent coordinator will provide the following:  Active Parent Resource Room, in which our parent coordinator and staff members will conduct informational workshops to support family understanding of the shifts in curriculum.  Weekly family workshops  Teacher created monthly newsletters and calendars for families  Website  Access to web-based programs, such as: MyOn, Mathletics, i-Ready, etc.   Lending libraries in active Parent Resource Room, in which a variety of texts will be made available to parents Invitations to district-wide parent workshops on extending student learning in the home Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Five scheduled preparation period to allow for grade teams to meet collaboratively ● Curricular materials and resources to support modification of curriculum ● Materials for parent workshops ● Professional texts and resources for PLCs ● Maximizing per session and per diem allotment for planning, curriculum development, data analysis, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2  By February 2019, 100% of students in kindergarten through 5th grade will understand the expectations needed to successfully complete and demonstrate progress with the Exemplar Library tasks, as evidenced by MOTP observations and the Exemplar Library rubrics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MOTP Observations and Danielson's Framework for Teaching Rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths evidenced by Parent Surveys and feedback  Learning leaders and parent volunteers are present and engaged throughout our school community, both inside and outside the classroom.  Vitally active PTA contributes to our community by conducting fundraisers and events that have encouraged involvement by all of our stake-holders.  Our new school newspaper includes family team members.  Selfie Awareness Anti-Bullying Campaign which includes the participation of parent volunteers who contribute time and resources to capture our events as shown in photographs and framed posters displayed throughout our hallways.  Active Parent Resource Room in which parents volunteer to conduct workshops for our community families, along with our parent coordinator and staff members Interactive school website, co-managed by parents  Parent computer lab and lending libraries including books in many languages   ESL classes open to our parents, as well as outside community members  Strong relationships with local businesses who donate goods and services to support fundraisers and events for the school.  Our guidance department provides resources and support for our families 2. Need(s) focus evidenced by Parent Surveys  More frequent cycles of learning opportunities focused on curriculum and instruction conducted by parent coordinator Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of parents will have the opportunity to attend bi-monthly workshops focused on curriculum and instruction and evidenced by pre-planned presentations and agendas. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The parent coordinator will provide at least five parent workshop sessions that address curriculum and instruction. All Parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator The Parent Coordinator will hold workshops for parents that will address how to help their child: create projects, access school designated programs such as iReady, Go Math and Mathletics, and how to access educational applications. Workshops will include evidence of supports for ELLs, SWDs, and other high-need student sub-groups. Parents will have access to the Parent room which is equipped with a computer mini lab during school hours. All Parents The Technology Teacher will work alongside parents to update website and include links and information that the parents are interested in. Technology Teacher and parents Sept. 2018-June, 2019 Sept. 2018-June, 2019 School Technology Teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Across the 2018-19 school year administrators, teachers, and the parent coordinator will provide the following:  Active Parent Resource Room, in which our parent coordinator and staff members will conduct informational workshops to support family understanding of the shifts in curriculum.  Teacher created monthly newsletters and calendars for families  Weekly family workshops  Website  Access to web-based programs, such as: MyOn, Mathletics, i-Ready, etc.   Lending libraries in active Parent Resource Room, in which a variety of texts will be made available to parents Invitations to district-wide parent workshops on extending student learning in the home 5  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1 parent coordinator and per session for teachers and supervisors Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, 100% of parents in grades K-5 will have the opportunity to have attended at lease three workshops focused on curriculum and instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. As evidenced by pre-planned presentations and agendas. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction, one to one instruction, whole class When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, during afterschool programs Small group instructions, one to one instruction, whole class During the school day, during afterschool programs Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) RtIInstruction; Balanced Literacy strategies, Info-Paired tests, Fundations, Close reads, listening centers, literacy stations, DOK level questioning, andiReady Mathletics, GoMath RTI instruction, ThinkCentral, Exemplars Library problem solving development and strategies, use of manipulatives and technology Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Asper NYSEDmemo: All students performing below the median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-8 English language arts (ELA) state assessment and/or Students showing limited progress over a period of at least 6-8 weeks based on Fountas and Pinnell and CCLS aligned rubrics. AsperNYSEDmemo: All students performing below the median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-8mathematics state assessment and/or Students showing no progress over a 7  Science period of at least 6-8 weeks based on Baseline, Mid-Chapter, and End of Unit Assessments. Students showing no progress over a period of at least 6-8 weeks based on Baseline and End of Unit Assessments. Social Studies Students showing no progress over a period of at least 6-8 weeks based on Baseline and End of Unit Assessments. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Parent request, teacher anecdotals, student request Hands on experiments, observations, Tier II and Tier III vocabulary instruction, reading comprehension with a focus on Science, instruction in study skills, informational writing, audio and visual cues, vocabulary application in discussions, DOK level questioning Tier II and Tier III vocabulary instructions, reading comprehension with a focus on Social Studies, visual and audio cues, informational writing, instruction in study skills, DOK level questioning Read alouds, value lessons, conflict resolution, and anti-bullying Small group instructions, one to one instruction, whole class During the school day Small group instructions, one to one instruction, whole class During the school day Small group instruction, one to one instruction, whole class During the school day 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 25 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Depending on needs, students will receive At-Risk intervention services and counseling. In addition, we provide those students with the materials needed to thrive academically, such as basic emergency supplies (e.g., uniforms, school supplies, books, glasses, etc.) and other educational services (e.g., counseling services, intervention programs), on a needs-by-needs basis. In addition, students are offered after school programs and support. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to support that staff is highly qualified the recruitment for mentoring programs, including individualized professional development plan for teachers, will be regularly reviewed and updated on our professional learning community calendar based on cycles of teacher observations (feedback sessions); classroom learning rounds and inter-visitations; identified trends during Common Planning Periods with Staff developers, etc. Some of our professional learning communities include, but are not limited to: Instructional Grade Leaders/Liaisons attend Professional Development; ; In-house Professional Development on Monday and Tuesday afternoons; City Wide P.D. and P.D. provided by Regional Liaisons. In regards to recruitment, our New Teacher Induction and Hiring committee, consisting of Administrators, teachers, and/or parents review, vet, and interview possible staff candidates. IN addition, Administrators attend job fairs; interview ATRs and long-term substitute teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All staff participates in on-going cycles of professional learning throughout the school year. During the 2017-2018 school year full day PD will take place in September, November, and June, as well as Monday afternoons. All sessions will focus on the alignment of curriculum to the Advanced Literacy philosophy, the CCLS and Danielson's Framework for Teaching. All staff members will engage in data discussions throughout the school year to identify trends and develop plans to address the individual and school wide needs of our students. All teachers will participate in intervisitation of model lessons with a specific focus area. Teachers and Paraprofessionals attend off site cycles of learning and turnkey information during common planning periods (one period a day). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 1  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● Kindergarten Orientation for Pre-Kindergarten parents ● Pre-Kindergarten parents receive information packets on how to assist their child in the transition to Kindergarten and attend a May Parent Teacher Conference event when they have the opportunity to meet the teachers and discuss expectations for Kindergarten. ● Pre-Kindergarten teachers plan lessons in accordance with the Pre-Kindergarten CCLS ● Parent Coordinator and Pre-Kindergarten social worker conducts parent involvement workshops. ● Pre-Kindergarten teachers attend citywide professional development. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet with each other and administrators during professional development sessions to develop assessments, curriculum adjustment, unit plans, and lesson plans. MOSL committee and UFT representative meets with teaching staff to make decisions on measures of student learning, assessments, curriculum adjustments, rubrics, and other evaluations. CCLS and Data teams meet with Administrators to make decisions regarding assessments and to evaluate data from multiple sources. During these opportunities to discuss student data, the team members identify trends and develop/modify instruction according to said data. This is a cyclical process carried throughout the school year. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 2  each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5A, 5B and 5E Sections 5A, 5B and 5C Section 5D Sections 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D and 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 283,656.00 Title II, Part A Federal 181,890.00 Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal 16,188.00 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,959,430.00 X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 3  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS234Q The School of Performing Arts & Technology, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS234Q The School of Performing Arts & Technology will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 5  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 6  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS234Q The School of Performing Arts & Technology School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS234Q The School of Performing Arts & Technology , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and 7  support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 8  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 9  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 0  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: P.S.234Q provides supplemental support services in the Title III after School Program to our English Language Learners and Former ELLs in grades 2, 3, 4, and 5. The program will be conducted in English utilizing ENL strategies and methods. A total of three ENL classes meet for 26 sessions on Fridays from 2:25 P.M. to 4:25 P.M., beginning January 2, 2019 and ending April 11, 2019. Over 60% of the Title III Funds will be used for classroom instruction. Classes will consist of 10-20 students per teacher. We anticipate a total of 45-50 students to be serviced by 3 ENL certified teachers. Teachers will plan and provide instruction aligned to NYS CCSS content and performance standards. Instructional focus will be on Literacy and Mathematics. Teachers will use ENL methodologies and strategies so that students can obtain the necessary skills required to score high on the NYSESLAT and other standardized based exams. Instruction will also target all four language modalities that are required in order for students to be successful in the arts and in the content areas. NYSESLAT data shows grades 2, 3, 4 and 5 have high needs for support and intervention within all the modalities, with an emphasis to both writing and reading components. These are the areas of greatest need for our ELL students. This support is essential in helping our ELL students achieve an increase in both NYSESLAT and ELA scores. NYSESLAT data, ELA data for our former ELLs, and The EDAT tool are utilized to determine students' individual and grouping needs. Students will be exposed to content-based thematic units of study. Center activities will be offered to students to practice and develop individual needs. Teachers will use ENL strategies and methods in planning and conducting units of study that include native language support. Students will be assessed in 3 cycles to determine movement and mastery of the skills being addressed. These assessments facilitate student grouping and instructional planning. Attendance will be maintained for all students to assure participants are consistent and receiving the utmost supports. Supplemental and general instructional supplies will be purchased to assure and support a high quality of instruction by all certified personnel. Title III allocation will also allow for the purchase of Mondo Balanced Literacy and Finish Line for ELLs. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration 3  Part C: Professional Development topics to be covered   name of provider Begin description here: The Title III Professional Development Program will provide teachers with Second Language Acquisition strategies and methodologies such as scaffolding, teacher-talk repertoire awareness, and best practices that support the differentiated instruction of ELLs and Former ELLs. All teachers and school building members, including staff who may not hold mandated ESL Jose P. Training will receive the training necessary to ensure the use of ENL strategies within the program and thus prepare students to meet and exceed NYS CCSS performance and learning standards while increasing their achievement scores on city and state wide tests. (The sessions are also open to Guidance Staff, Paraprofessionals, and SBS Team members.) These sessions will be conducted during the Monday Professional Development sessions at no cost to the Title III program by our ENL coordinators (Mr. Perez and Mr. Guerrero) as well as other in-house ENL certified teachers. Attendance and an agendas will be provided and maintained by the program's supervisor in the main office as well as the ENL coordinators. Professional Development Topics: Schedule, Duration, and Topic 1. November 7, 2018 (2 hour session) This session will be devoted to Scaffolding across the Disciplines. Types of Scaffolding will include; differentiation of lessons according to students’ level of language acquisition; differentiation of lessons following the multiple intelligences and learning styles of the students. Teachers will understand how data impacts the ENL lesson, groupings, and individual student needs. 2. December 10, 2018 (2 hour session) This session is devoted to Differentiated Instructional Strategies and using the EDAT tool. Training will include discussions on creating opportunities that ensure the differences in how individual students learn academic content. Discussions around researched-based instructional strategies, grouping, scheduling, and using on-going assessments as feedback to map focused lessons that support and develop students' individual areas of need. In addition, participants will be guided on using the (EDAT) to drive instruction for groups and or individual students. 3) January 21, 2019 (2 hour session) The session focuses on developing an understanding of the NYSESLAT. Participants will learn strategies under The Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA) model of instruction. This will help them understand how to implement learning strategies so that students can grasp concepts much easier and faster and make gains on the NYSESLAT. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 4  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: The Title III Program at PS 234 will provide our parents and guardians of ELLs and Former ELLs with the opportunity to attend a variety of family literacy and math workshops, enabling them to assist and understand the education and learning of their children at home. We aim to help bring about multicultural awareness and appreciation by providing our parents with an understanding of the academic content and standards that all students are expected to meet. The content and topic for these workshops were selected in accordance with the needs of our ELL population and a careful analysis of how our parents can be our partners in educating our ELL students. Parent workshops will be conducted during after school hours by English/Spanish Bilingual ENL Coordinators ; Mr. Perez and Mr.Guerrero and the Parent Coordinator, Mr. Brown. Parents will be guided in the following areas: Parents will be notified of these activities through the school's website, email, phone calls and written letters inviting them to participate in these informative and engaging activities. Our ENL coordinators will maintain a binder maintaining records of attendance, agendas and invitations to these activities. Topics: 1.November 2018 One 2 hour NYSESLAT Informative Session for Parents focusing on the contents and formats of the NYSESLAT and ELA tests. This session will also help parents understand the four modalities of language acquisition and in term how they can best utilize life activities as learning experiences to help their children in the language acquisition process. 2. December 2018 One 2 hour workshop on using math games and math strategies based on Go-Math units of study. Parents will be instructed on how to help their children practice the skills taught in class at home as an everyday activity tool. Parents will have the opportunity to understand how every day activities can work as a tool to help their children practice the target skills. A focus on how native language skills can transferred to English skills will be stressed. 3. January 2019 One 2 hours session on supporting oral language development and vocabulary. Discussions will center on ways for all parents and guardians, regardless of their home language, education, or literacy level to help develop children’s oral language skills and literacy efforts. Translation and interpretation services will be provided for parents who might require or request these services for all the parental engagement activities. Translation and interpretation will be provided by available staff that speak the language requested. The DOE translation and interpretation unit will also be contacted to assist us with languages for which our staff can not provide these services. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 5 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name The School of Performing Arts and Techno Borough select one School Number 234 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Dora Danner Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mr. Jose Guerrero Mr. Rolando Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Mr. Petros Chalkitis Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Ms. Peggy Mouzakitis Coach N/A School Counselor Ms. Olga Papadapoulos Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Jabari Brown Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 9 10 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 455 7 Total number of ELLs 81 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.80%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 K 0 Lang. N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 4 0 3 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 234Q makes use of various assessment tools to evaluate ELL literacy skills. The main one being The Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment Literacy Program. This program helps teachers to determine progress in literacy development in children from grades K-5 . The assessment is comprised of 58 high-quality original titles, or “little books” divided evenly between fiction and non-fiction. The assessment measures decoding, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension skills for students in Kindergarten through 5th Grade. The set of books, recording forms, and other materials serve as an assessment tool for the teachers, literacy specialists, and clinicians to use in determining students’ developmental reading levels for the purpose of informing instruction and documenting reading progress. The program includes Benchmark Assessment Books that are vertically and horizontally aligned and become difficult as a reader progresses through the levels of difficulty. Included are: individual administered group activities designed to measure each child’s progress in Phonemic Awareness, Phonics, Reading and Oral Expression, and Listening levels. Each level provides benchmarks that correspond to a 8  specific grade and term. Take for example Level A- levels, that correspond to the beginning of Grade Kindergarten, while a level E corresponds to the end of Kindergarten and beginning of First Grade. The results indicate that 65% of the ELL population of students are below level in reading levels as determined through The Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment Literacy Program. The results are maintained in class record sheets that are to all educators involved in educating ELL students. The results include every strand and its sub-skills. IT also includes the level each student has achieved in each strand and spelling conventions. If a child does not master an Individual Activity, he/she is reassessed on those sub-skills not mastered during the subsequent assessment periods until mastery is achieved. Teachers, at PS 234Q, also generate source assessment records for each ELLs using formal and informal data, including work samples. They include: On Demand Writing (K-2), Spanish LAB, NYC Writing Page 29 Prompt (K-5), Running Records (December & March), and DRA (Fall & Spring). Analysis and review tools turn a vast amount of data into valuable, easily consumable information. Data offers snapshots of individual ELLs' performance, allowing teachers to track select data elements over time to make meaningful goals and objectives for individual students. The data obtained, through the various assessments, is used to guide our curriculum planning to created strategic and effective educational plans that cover a broad range of CCLS and rigorous school interests. These include assessments, student supports, supplementary services, financial expendintures, and ways other helpful tools to help us in closing the achievement gap. Data reveals struggle with print awareness, decoding, phoneminc awareness, summarizing, grasping details, paraphrasing, drawing conclusions, inferencing, and understanding organizational structures of writing. The results obtained determine the appropriate curriculum and instructional plans to address ELLs' individual needs. Data indicates ELLs greatest challenge resides in reading comprehension and in reading fluency. Instruction is designed to incorporate differentiated lessons where the needs of individual or groups of students are addressed utilizing strategies and lessons aligned with CCLS. Teachers are provided with current instructional materials that incorporate lessons to address the needs of all students, including ELLs. In addition, we incorporate MOSL (Measure of Student Learning) and Formative Assessments teacher observations, questioning, class discussions, exit slips, peer'/self assessment, presentations, and think-pair share. PS 234 conducted an evaluation of the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores, of the currently enrolled ELL students, was conducted with a focus in 2 distinct areas: The scores for NYSESLAT were analyzed through the EDAT tool and the scale score model provided by the NY Department of Education. Using the data obtained we were able to determine the level of proficiency in reading and writing components as well as the listening and speaking components for each individual child. The tool also provided us with a full analysis and breakdown of the ELL students' scores indicating area of weaknesses as wells as risk factors. This data provided us with the necessary information to develop and set a plan to for teach our ELL students in an effective and coordinated manner. The data indicates that in grade K-2. ELL students performed well in the listening and speaking component and showed weakness in the reading and writing components. In grades 3rd-5th The results indicate that reading and writing are the areas where our students need intervention with the development of a curriculum that addresses their needs. The EDAT tool also provided us with an analysis of each individual student scores. We were able to identify their areas of need and group them accordingly for intervention and curriculum planning. Overall the ELL population as well as the general education population have performed below expectations in the past, part to the more rigorous, unfamiliar format and expectations aligned with the Common core standards. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? PS 234Q's Data and PPT teams evaluate the implementation and development of curriculum, according to the data trends, through out the year.. They provide feedback to teachers across the board and provide guidance in the modifications to the curriculum that can be made to support student needs, learning cycles, and progress monitoring. Data analysis assessments of our instructional plans incorporate differentiated lessons where the needs of individual or groups of students are addressed. Teaching teams meet to plan units of studies aligned to CCLS and Balanced Literacy. Teachers are provided current instructional materials that incorporate lessons centered on the needs of all students, including ELLs. ELLs are placed in appropriate settings and allotted minutes of ENL instruction according to their levels of proficiency. We ensure language acquisition is emphasized as a whole. Our selected curriculum of Balanced Literacy contains the tools necessary implement this curriculum in diverse forms to address the needs ELL students. The Balanced Literacy model has built in components infuse interdisciplinary content area lessons that address the language needs of our ELL students. 9  Lessons contain assessments to determine mastery of specific areas of need. Once the data is analyzed, our teachers set the course necessary and remediation is put in place when necessary. This is an on going process that is flexible and gives our staff the room to gather data and then used it in creating focused rigorous lessons. PS 234’s CCLS and Data teams look at practices in the classroom, trends in data, and assess the curriculum, to provide feedback to teachers across the grades. Curriculum modifications are made to provide student progress monitoring and support throughout the learning cycles. In addition, the administration ensures program schedules allow five scheduled common preparation periods, during which ENL teachers can meet weekly to continue work on meeting instruction for ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? PS 234Q utilizes the following summative/benchmark assessments to determine our students' level of growth as well as their areas of need. All these assessments are analyzed and utilized to guide our instruction of individual and group of students. We also use them to select curriculum and to modify it accordingly. The information shown by the data collected, on individual students or group of students, determines our next steps in addressing the needs of our ELL students. The EDAT data provided an analysis of the NYSESLAT, ELA and MATH assessments. The data reveals that ELL students lag across grades k-5 in reading and while writing fluctuates. It also shows a correlation in their performance in math as compare to their levels in NYSESLAT. The data indicates that the higher the proficiency in NYSESLAT the better the performance in the MATH exam.The correlation is also true when NYSESLAT proficiency levels and their performance on ELA. After a careful analysis of these results our school wide plan is set in motion and the appropriate interventions are set forward. Our staff as well as our students are provided with the essential tools necessary to remediate each area of need for individual or group of students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? PS 234Q's administrators and staff members dedicate themselves to developing and improving the learning goals and performance of our ELL students. Several groups of teacher teams meet regularly throughout the year to address summative assessments and discuss data. These teams include,Grade Leader Committees, Data committee, CCLS Committee, Advanced Literacy Core Team, Professional Learning Committee, CEP Team and LAP Team. Our administrators will monitor weekly common planning sessions to ensure that student work is being analyzed and utilized to further instruction. Additionally, lesson plans will be reviewed during the observation process. Our midpoint benchmark will take place in February of 2018, to determine whether there has been an increase in teacher ratings for Component 1e, comparing teacher ratings between Observation Cycles 1 and 2. Progress monitoring will take place during our monthly meetings and common preparation periods. We will discuss and identified students to determine program effectiveness, measured by the decrease in the number of incidents those students have displayed. After a careful analysis of the findings we will provide professional development sessions both in school and attend network-provided professional development series as well. Professional development opportunities are presented to the staff from various institutions based on observation data collected by administration and needs-assessments made by individual teachers who are reflective in their practice. A time period is set for the students to complete and fill the academic gaps. ELLs are evaluated by our teachers to determine student learning and skill acquisition within the skills. After reviewing the findings, data is recorded and used for curriculum planning. Data is gathered, monitored and used to set educational goals and guided lessons for individual or groups of students. During the 2017-18 school year collaborative teams will include roles and responsibilities, which are accountable as evidenced by contributions made by each team member. Teachers, grade teams, and guests professional developers, will continue to meet during their common preparation periods to analyze, discuss, and plan units uf study within target areas. Best practices as well as methodologies that yield good results are discussed during planning. Summative assessment data is also shared with the next grade teachers to help 0  collaborate in improving teaching methods and students outcomes from year to year. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] PS 234Q uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the RTI framework. We ensure instruction begins with assessments that determine the necessary conditions for effectively promoting English language development. The framework is led by 5 objectives for participants: understand how RTI models supports instruction for ELLs; analyze assessment approaches alongside with required adjustments; data analysis that reveals patterns and trends; modifying the instructional core and supplemental supports for ELLs; supports at the school-level. in addition, we utilize data to determine which intervention models should be used to addressed the academic gaps as well as the socio-emotional needs of our ELL students. The RTI model is one of the intervention programs we are currently using to provide our ELL students with targeted interventions in their specific areas of need. We provide teachers with the necessary curriculum and resources to support our ELLs within their classrooms. Teachers are also provided with the essential professional developments to educate them in how to use and approach the RTI model to close the gaps in academic performance. These gaps are identified through an analysis of the data obtained the Language Proficiency assessments. PS 234Q makes use of the EDAT tool advanced early warning indicators. It provides us with at-risk level ELLs in Literacy and Math. This information is key in having our teachers choose the correct intervention model for each of our ELL students. It provides multiple entry points and approaches when creating the intervention plans for individual or groups of students. We identify factor such home language proficiency, number of years of ENL services, students with interrupted formal education along with other factors that affect the academic performance of our ELL students. The tool allows projection of status in coming years and one can expand an analyze student achievement data in the content areas. The system provides early warning indicators, identifies NYSESLAT, ELA and MATH progress. The user can also create custom "at risk" categories and identify pockets of trends of success, such as programmatic differences between groups of students who progress toward proficiency and best practices towards English proficiency. We consider all these factors when creating our intervention plans. We provide the necessary channels for parent-teacher communication in order to have collaboration between home and school. This collaboration gives us the opportunity to have the parents share with us any information that would make our intervention plan more successful for the individual ELL students. Like wise, teachers share with the parents the results of our intervention plan. Our interventions programs take into account our students academic needs as well as their socio-emotional needs This ensures a well balanced intervention program where all the needs of our students are addressed. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. PS 234Q applies several outcome assessments in order to evaluate and inform our ENL program. This ensures that our ELLs’ second language development is considered in instructional decisions. We take into consideration how much previous education the student hasn't had in the U.S. or the home country. We also consider language and literacy proficiency levels in the first language and what type of support there is at home. Subsequently, we examine if prospective general education teachers have knowledge of how to use effective second language teaching strategies and second acquisition processes for ELLs. Furthermore, we look at supplemental supports to provide ELLs' social and academic language needs. EDAT tool results, indicate ELLs perform better in the listening and speaking components of the NYSESLAT and are grouped at the Expanding or Transitioning proficiency component levels- a pattern supported throughout the grades. Lower and upper grade students showed a performance lapse in the reading and writing components. ELA and Math results were also analyzed using the EDAT tool to determine the performance outcomes of ELLs in these academic area. Data obtained from assessments will be used for scheduling and instructional planning within the content areas of study. 1  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Once the assessment results were analyzed, through the EDAT tool, the teachers teams were provided with reports of the data for their groups and for individual students. This data included all the modalities of English; Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking. Data was also desiminated during Monday Professional Developments as well as other assigned hours, common planning, accessible on ATS reports. The teacher teams and administration met to determine the proper curriculum to appropriately support these students. The data obtained was use to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework by providing students with targeted instruction designed to meet their learning and language needs by their performance on the Periodic and Benchmark assessments. The teacher teams came together and developed high-quality instructional environments for our entire population of students which includes our ELLs We also placed specific emphasis on those student who are flagged as “at risk” or “below the benchmark”. On any particular skill or competency, the student receives development in this area. Our administrators have continued to communication the data and provide educators with the tools they need to collaborate. They provide built-in time for teachers to analyze data, problem solve and plan horizontally across the grades and well as vertically (grade leaders) to share data, address needs and celebrate success. Classroom, AIS, and Special Education teachers use data to differentiate instruction for ELLs in their classroom. They maximize student potential by sharing insights into student’s home life, family background and interest. Writing skills are addressed by providing the student with different types of writing tools, dialogue, journals, and providing lessons within word work in context. (phonemic awareness, phonics, and sight words) Modeling language structures and the writing process is largely used. Parents are invited to share child's previous schooling and language experiences. the layers of instructional support and intervention provided the ELL student with early intervention through a tiered system. The teams of educators continued to meet during common preparation periods to discusses the data and developed plans to address the needs of our ELL students. The needs of each individual student as well as for groups of students were analyzed and utilized to developed target lessons to focus on their needs. The Balanced Literacy Program was determined to have all the components to properly address the needs of our population of students which include our ELLs. PS 234Q CEP and LAP teams will also be utilized to disseminate data. Teachers, administration, and parental feedback are considered when examining the success or needs of our individual or groups of students. This data analysis provides our staff with the knowledge of how to evaluate instruction and how data can use to have better outcomes. Professional development hours will be allotted for these teams to communicate their finding to the entire school personnel in order to have them understand and address the needs of our ELL students population. The development of lessons and the materials utilized to teach, ELL students, was based on the trends and indicators the data analysis yielded. As indicated by the data trends the main focus will be but not limited to, reading and writing. Differentiated instruction lessons will be implemented to address the needs of ELL students in the four modalities; reading, writing, listening and speaking. New Technologies such as the promethean boards and laptop carts will be used through out the school year as tools in the implementation and obtainment of these goals. Additionally Professional Development ours will include ours to develop the implementation of the chosen curriculum programs design to address the needs of our ELL students. These programs will include the the Fundations Phonics that is utilized to supplement the reading and writing programs. This as well as the Advanced Literacy program for shared and guided reading . Emphasis will also be given to developing and adding more ENL strategies to the lessons being taught. The ENL components of the Ready Gen reading series as well as supplemental ENL materials will be utilized as useful tools in the achievement of these goals. The students will also be supported individually through conferencing between teacher and student. Furthermore, Data will be disseminated during our Title III Professional development hours. We will conduct after school programs, through Title III. This program will serve as additional support for ELL students in need of academic remediation and or enrichment. Teachers we analyze and be provided with the data essential to utilizing the proper curriculum that address our ELL students needs. 2  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. PS 234Q establishes instructional programs that are based on sound research and have the characteristics of successful programs. The goal of the ENL program is to develop students’ listening, speaking, reading, and writing proficiency so that ELL student performance is equivalent to that of their comparable native English-speaking peers in all the content areas. Test score distributions of ENL students and native English speakers, initially quite different at the beginning of their school years, should be equivalent by the end of their school years as measured by on-grade-level tests of all school subjects administered. Furthermore the ENL program delivered, at PS 234Q, is tailored to students’ levels and needs. A variety of ENL strategies are implemented in all ENL models used at P.S. 234 Q. Among the strategies are scaffolding, Total Physical Response, strategic grouping, the use of visual and audio aides, the use of graphic organizers, labeling objects, opportunities for oral language development, hands-on activities, and modeling writing and reading. These strategies are also incorporated in teaching the content areas to the population of ELL students. PS 234Q promotes a push-in self-contained ENL stand alone. The ENL self-contained model groups ELLs homogeneously with other students of various levels of proficiency. ELLs are instructed by a dually certified common branch/ENL teachers. Entering and Emerging ELLs are provided with 360 of instructional minutes of ENL instruction. Expanding and Transitioning ELLs receive 180 minutes of ENL services. ELLs are serviced heterogeneously and homogeneously throughout the programmed push-in advanced literacy instructional day by Dually Certified Common Branch/ENL Teachers. In the grades where the numbers allow for advanced students to be homogeneously grouped, a dually certified Common Branch or ENL Teacher pushes in for 180 minutes of ENL instruction. In the groups that are heterogeneously grouped, a dually certified Common Branch or ENL teacher pushes in to provide 360 minutes of ENL instruction for Entering and Emerging students as per NYS mandates. To ensure mandated instructional minutes are provided in accordance to proficiency level we analyze NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores. Scores are used to identify Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding students. Numbers of minutes of ENL instruction are allotted as required by New York State mandates. At PS234Q, ELLs are serviced within 8 Self contained ENL classes, otherwise the remaining ELLs are serviced by a push-in teacher for the duration of time based on their English proficiency levels and minutes required as per NYS mandates. Our ELL students are also afforded the instruction in ELA as the rest of the student population. This include all the components being taught to general education classes. ELL students are immersed in literacy to assure a balanced education and followed the mandated allocated units of ELA intruction. ELLs who are identified as Spanish speakers are provided with the Spanish NYSITELL to determine their level of proficiency in their native language. The ELL population of students is also provided with native language libraries in all the classrooms at PS 234. This is to provide the academic support the ELL students need as they work to achieve proficiency in English. During testing the students are provided with glossaries in their native language as well as translation services when required. Former ELLs are provided with 90 weekly minutes of Integrated ENL instruction/support services in order to ease their 3  transition into mainstreamed General Education Instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? At PS 234Q the staff is knowledgeable of the mandated ENL teaching minutes as per PART-154. Our ENL coordinators generates ATS reports such as the RLAT and the RLER to determine student eligibility and needs. The students placement is set up along with schedules and groupings that are designed according to the ELLs' proficiency level and modalities. Based on student proficiency levels, weekly time instruction is programed as follows: a minimum of 360 ENL minutes for Entering and Emerging levels; 180 weekly ENL minutes/180 ELA minutes for Transitioning and Expanding; 90 ENL minutes for Commanding level students. Teaching schedules are distributed to administrators and classroom teachers where the ELL students are receiving instruction. Schedules are adhered to in order to ensure that all ELL students receive all mandated minutes of service. Mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to proficiency NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores. Entering and Emerging students receive mandated time of 360 minutes while the Transitioning and Expanding students receive the mandated time of 180 minutes. Former ELLs are provided with 90 weekly minutes of Integrated ENL instructional support services. The student are then placed in classes that comply with the individual needs of each ELL student. Certified pedagogues are then assigned to teach these classes and instruct the students according to the determination made for placement and time allocation. The Push-In Program and self contained ENL models are the primary models for instructing ELL students at P.S. 234 Q. There are 8 push in ENL classes and 6 self contained ENL classes in grades K – 5th. All ELL students are serviced by ENL certified or dually certified teachers. Our building staff is knowledgeable of mandated ENL teaching blocks. The ENL coordinator gathers ATS reports such as the RLAT and the RLER to determine student eligibility and needs. Subsequently, placement is set up along with schedules and groupings that are designed according to the ELLs' proficiency level and modality. Based on student proficiency levels, weekly time instruction is allotted as follows: a minimum of 360 ENL minutes for Entering and Emerging levels; 180 weekly ENL minutes/180 ELA minutes for Transitioning and Expanding; 90 ENL minutes for Commanding level students. Teaching schedules are distributed to administrators and pertinent classroom teachers. Schedules are adhered to in order to ensure that all LEP students receive all mandated minutes of service. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At PS 234, teaching strategies, questioning, and routines are strategically differentiated so that all learners, including students with disabilities and ELLS, have multiple entry points, supports, and extensions into the curricula according to grade and language levels. New understandings are built on previous understandings. For example, an intermediate ELL student who understands how to compose sentences is getting ready to create paragraphs. Therefore, the ELL instructor modifies the lesson to provide this student with support in paragraph writing/formation. All required services a resources provided are grade appropriate. All ELLs have access to the resources that are provided for other classrooms within their grade level. Through differentiation, ENL teachers and ENL push-in teachers provide appropriate resources and teacher created materials according to proficiency level of their students. Our school has 10 active New York State ENL certified teachers ensuring instructional approaches and methods are in place so that content is comprehensible and meets CCLS demands. We ensure ELLs become proficient in English, the target language 4  and prepare our ELLs not only for academic rigorous state grade assessments but also for future educational achievements by means of content area push-in/pull-out instruction that is rigorous and aligned to CCLS. We offer students the opportunity to develop their social language and engage in hands-on academic activities with the numerous content areas. Lessons are taught using ENL methodologies such as Total Physical Response(TPR), CALLA (Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach), scaffolding, bridging, and schema building, concept mapping, and contextualization. Scholars are also exposed to Holistic Language Learning Approaches, Explicit Instruction, Inquiry Based Learning, and Interdisciplinary-based Learning. ELLs’ instruction employs the same materials as our non-ELL programs and includes supplemental materials such as guided reading ENL level libraries. In addition, they are provided with optional English and native language versions of formal assessments. To ensure success, all English Language Learners are held to the same standards as the general education population. This is accomplished using an array of instructional materials that are comprised of and provide ENL foundations, theories, and methodologies. ENL-based supplemental materials include: Ready Gen Leveled Readers, Mondo's Bookshop Literacy Program. Our ELLs are exposed to mainstream classroom math (Go Math) and science texts that take ELLs language development needs into consideration. Charts, realia, manipulatives, and other approaches or tools such as field trips are employed in order to support language development. Our students are assessed throughout the units and groupings are changed in accordance with RTI model protocols. ENL teachers provide additional oral language support for the development of academic English in all content areas. This to ensure our students' needs are met through comprehensible input. Our ENL teachers plan intentionally for content, literacy, and language development using the following data: (F&P Benchmark; NYSESLAT; our curricula assessments- Ready-Gen, TCRWP Units of Studies, Reading Reform, Inquiry based units that integrate literacy and the NYCDOE Scope and Sequence for Science and Social Studies, Go Math Units of Studies aligned to CCLS; and knowledge of best literacy and ELL research based practices. We also use NYSELSAT Speaking rubrics to assess for oral language development as well. Teacher teams meet to look at student data and work to plan targeted instruction to meet the need of our ELLs. To support background knowledge and vocabulary, we use an inquiry based approach to learning (thematic / interdisciplinary), where students are immersed in hands on experiences through trips, media, visual, and front loading of vocabulary. We also use graphic organizers such as concept maps and semantic maps to support the oral language development and academic language. Technology is weaved into the curriculum as a means to differentiate and support all learners in all four modalities. Sentence frames and starters (differentiated for various proficiency levels) are provided to support students to engage in collaborative conversations. Explicit teaching of Tier 2 words throughout the school allows for the development of academic vocabulary for all students. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As determined through program choice letters PS 234Q is implementing the Free standing ENL model. However, we adhere to the New York State guidelines indicating that within ten days of initial enrollment new entrants who are identified as Spanish speaking ELLs are administered the Spanish LAB (Form B) so that staff can gauge a range of skills that students can exhibit in their native language. The ELL population of students is also provided with native language libraries in all the classrooms at PS 234. This to provide the academic support the ELL students need as they work to achieve proficiency in English. During, content area, testing the students are provided with glossaries in their native language as well as translation services when required. Translation and interpretation are also provided to students during State testing as per the New York mandates for any language required.. 5  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. Plan fpr SIFE ELLs. Our SIFE students' history are examined to determine their needs for accommodations. SIFE students are placed in ideal groups and learning environments that best meet their socio/academic needs, Once SIFE ELLS are properly placed, we continue to provide them with additional support. This in order to ease their transition while acquiring English language proficiency. SIFE students are monitored and assessed in order to continuously determine mastery and next steps in their language acquisition development. Our teachers use a variety of strategies to instruct our SIFE students. They include the use of the Fundation phonic series, vocabulary building, grammar and comprehension skills through the Reading for Concepts series, the Treasure Chest Reading series which provides the ELL students with additional support to master the English language and SRA for the development of specific reading and language skills. The SIFE ELL student population is also supported through the use of the ENL component of Ready Gen which is the current reading program utilized at PS 234Q. ELL students are exposed to a variety of learning materials that include listening, speaking, reading and writing through the use of the Language/Learning LAB. This through the Balanced Literacy program. SIFE students are also given priority consideration for placement in the after school program. We will also use funds such as Title III and resources that will enable this population to secure achievement and make essential academic gains. Supplemental services for SIFE students can include intensive ENL, extended day program, reading and math intervention, summer school participation, one-to-one tutoring and additional parental outreach. The ELL students will be attending an extra 60 minutes Wednesdays and Thursdays which will be utilized to provide extra instructional support. B. Plan for Newcomers( ELLs). Our ENL teachers have plans, instructional goals and strategies for all ELL newcomers. The ENL teachers assist them in developing their basic interpersonal communication skills with a focus on oral language development. Our ENL teachers also work alongside classroom teachers so that the new student receives optimum support and interventions. Newcomers are, when possible, paired with a classroom teacher or “class buddies” who are proficient in the child’s first and target language. The classroom teachers receive professional development and additional dialogue on ENL methodologies and strategies for fostering and maintaining a Sheltered English classroom. Interactions can range from fostering language that is relevant to everyday life situations, creating context-rich classroom environments and wait-time considerations. The ELL newcomers are given the opportunity to participate in the after school programs. This provides them with more exposure to the English language. While receiving more individualized attention by the teachers, as the groups are smaller. In addition, these children will continue to attend the Title III program.This program will be utilized to provide extra instructional support. Within the regular schedule, the teachers provide the students with individualized instruction to help the student with lessons that address their level of proficiency. The newcomers are placed within ENL classrooms that provide the proper setting for language development. The variance of levels in the classroom allows the teacher to group the students strategically. Our newcomers are exposed to numerous resources such as additional time at classroom listening centers, English Language Learning software, differentiated and age appropriate content-based supplemental materials, and native language content math books and glossaries These students are also provided with books and other necessary materials to scaffold their learning. These include the Mondo Let's Talk About It series, Language Patterns and Usage series, Write Away Skills Book and the Mondo Shared and Guided Reading Series. This as well as the Fundation Phonics Program. Through the use of these series, the students develop vocabulary, grammar and other language skills. These students are also given the opportunity to read books and respond to them in their native languages (when available). The classroom libraries are being enhanced with books in languages other than English. This allows the newcomers to continue developing their skills in the native language which will eventually be transferred to the second language. At the same time, this methodology keeps their interest level 6  high and builds their self-esteem. The ENL certified teachers provide professional development to the rest of our school staff working with the ELLs. They are provided with information on how to make the transition of the newcomers into a new culture and language smoother. C. Plan for 4-6 years ELLS. Our ENL teachers have instructional goals and plans for ELLs receiving 4-6 years of service. Appropriate ENL and strategies methodologies included learning experiences that focus on their weaknesses in the language modalities as per NYSESLAT EDAT tool reports. These students are then provided with intervention services designed to differentiate instruction to their individual needs. Intervention specialists conduct pre-testing for the diagnosis of the students needs which are then addressed through small group settings and goal based instruction of these needs Other relevant periodic ELA and Math related forms of concrete data will be used to drive instruction. For the most part, this population of ELLs’ strengths lie in listening and speaking comprehension. They lag in reading and writing skills. Therefore, we emphasize reading and writing. Our school uses collaborative group work and cooperative learning experiences such as jigsaw that promote problem-solving and accountable talk. Lessons provide explicit instruction in the structure of English language, background building, bridging, and academic vocabulary development. Supplemental strategies and services are afforded for ELLs who are struggling academically. Small group activities, We stress that teachers have individual meeting with students to discuss their strengths and needs. We also have our teachers inform their parents of their child’s 4-6 years service status and its standardized testing exemption implications. These students are also giving ample opportunities to participate in enrichment activities such as music, art and drama during and after school. This provides the setting students to interact with the general population of students and receive additional support in language development. D. Plan for Long Term ELLs. PS 234Q provides careful consideration for Long-Term ELLs. Aside from using ENL methodologies previously mentioned, we provide supplemental techniques, strategies and scaffold instruction. The number of students in the long term ELL category at P.S. 234Q is low. Our plan for these students is to provide them with extra support in the classroom. They are provided with intervention services which include extra practice in reading, writing and test taking skills. They are exposed to higher learning critical thinking activities through project based team teaching by ENL and mainstream classroom teachers. They are also invited to the After School Program and Saturday Academy for ELLs. Within these programs they are provided with reinforcement in the four modalities of learning. The ENL teachers utilize computers and other forms of technology to provide the students with different language practice materials. Additionally Long term ELLs may receive additional individualized support and instruction to help meet their educational needs. Academic Intervention Services (AIS), ELA/Math support services, peer tutoring, one-to-one tutoring, counseling, Intensive ENL, and support or focus on weak linguistic modalities are considered and assigned to targeted ELLs. In addition to supplemental services, observations and data collection, Long-Term ELLs may be discussed at length by the AIS Team, upon where alternative services or programming may be assigned. Long term ELLs will also be included in the Title III After school and summer programs, which will be utilized to provide extra instructional support. E. Plan for former ELLs 1 to 2 years. Former ELL students meet the definition for a student that scored proficient in the 4 modalities of English as per NYSESLAT. At PS 234Q these students are afforded the opportunity to receive additional support by being placed in classrooms where dually licensed teachers, CB and ENL, provide ENL instruction to ELL and Former ELL students. These Students are also given the opportunity to participate in after school programs designed for ELL students. Additionally, these students receive support with materials that are appropriate and helpful in continuing to develop their academic language skills in English. Furthermore, the former ELL students are afforded time extension acomodations for state tests such ELA, Math and Science. 7  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? PS 234Q The School of Performing Arts and Technology takes pride in providing our students with the most up to date learning tools. Firstly all the pedagogues servicing these students are provided with a copy of the IEP for the particular students. The teachers become familiar with the goals and needs of the students and plans accordingly utilizing the data obtained through various assessment tools. ENL services are determined through NYSESLAT or NYSITELL scores. Technology is supported using Promethean Boards and computerized carts and computers in the classrooms- a tool utilized to develop and conduct lessons that addresses the learning styles of all students through rigourous differentiated instruction. Furthermore the students have access to laptop computers that served as tools for the teacher to address the needs of the individual students. The four modalities of ENL Reading, Writing, Speaking and Listening are addressed through differentiated lessons. These and other technologies are utilized to enhance teaching throughout the core curriculum and as additional support for ELL and general education students. Two additional laptop computer carts have been added to our increasing collection to further support our student population, in their learning, with the latest technology. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL teacher considers IEP requirements for ELLs identified as having special needs. Math, reading, and attendance data is reviewed monthly. Supplemental services that include individual or small group sessions are held during the school day. They include: occupational and physical therapy, the development of social skills in small groups, sessions for anger management, and stress reduction sessions. Remediation and reinforcement of concepts/subskills required to learn are emphasized. Small group differentiated ENL instruction that take into account the child’s strengths and weak linguistic modalities are taken into account when scheduling and designing a student's ENL program. Wherever possible special needs ELLs are provided with supplementary learning aids and are afforded least restrictive settings such as CTT classroom settings, after-school classes, and pull-out small guided reading activities. Students with IEPs and students identified as “at-risk” are carefully monitored by classroom and SETSS teachers to ensure progress is made. Teachers assess ELLs periodically throughout the year. Classroom teachers and SETSS teachers meet regularly to discuss: short term goals, progress made with specific skills, differentiated instruction, modifications needed for class work, curriculum planning, implementing interventions, and to reflect on how the various interventions and modifications have worked thus far. At times, students may be decertified from some or all services over time when it is determined that all goals are met and no support services are needed. Our ELL students with disabilities participate in a high quality, rigorous curriculum that is CCLS aligned, culturally-relevant, and differentiated. Staff members are encouraged to participate in professional development activities directed at enhancing the outcomes of ELL-SWDs. PS 234’s ESL coordinator and the IEP teachers communicate to work together along with General Education teachers to ensure that paraprofessionals, and related personnel, such as therapists and social workers, meet the individualized students' needs within the ELL-SWD’s education programming. Entering and Emerging students receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction. Advanced students receive 180 minutes of ENL instructions in addition to ELA instruction. Supplemental minutes of ENL instruction are offered depending on language needs. The review of IEP mandates is generated and ENL teachers take part in reviewing annual goals and are involved in the IEP re-evaluation processes. Teachers provide Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports (PBIS) practices and strategies for all students to increase academic performance, improve safety, decrease problem behavior, and establish a positive school culture. We provide instructional expectations for all assignments in multiple formats that include written or oral. ELL students are taught alternate strategies needed to meet standards such as different approaches to learning math, special text editing strategies, behavior management tools such as self-talk, anger management, etc. ELL students with disabilities receive differentiated instruction that includes: scaffolding, learning/interest centers, manipulatives, varying the length time content completion, and encourage advanced learners to pursue topics with greater rigor, and flexible grouping (RTI). 8  Our teachers include supplemental curriculum materials specifically designed to help students acquire general education content to meet CCLS and benchmarks. Web-based software is available for ELL-SWDs as follows (in the areas of Math and Reading). The programs are grade-level appropriate. ELL-SWDs utilize the same grade-level materials that general education use. They include: Go Math, Ready Gen., social studies and science texts. Lessons are adapted or modified using supplemental materials and strategies to make input comprehensible. NYSESLAT preparation is instructed within the grade band to include content curricula lessons that employ general education texts and include content material adaptations to make lessons more comprehensible and level appropriate. When necessary, teachers re-visit curricular content and provide additional guided practice before, after, or as appropriate, during class time. Students are also provided with extended learning opportunities to increase their rate of learning. We provide strategy cards or rubrics to remind students of the processes or steps needed to complete a task or a desired behavior. Students are also involved in monitoring and charting their own progress using clearly defined performance standards that include rubrics. Our ELL-SWDs are provided with encouragement, gentle/polite reminders, verbal prompts, and additional “wait-time.” All service providers submit and revise program placement on a regular basis to ensure flexibility so that appropriate academic services are rendered. We adhere to IEP documented recommendations to ensure that SWDs are placed in their correct setting. Non-SWDs who are ELLs are placed in ICT classrooms when appropriate and ratio of General Education to Special Education teachers is balanced. Students benefit from having 2 teachers in an ICT setting as they provide additional support for not only SWDs but also for non-SWDs ELLs. Of note, ELLs SWDs continue to receive their mandated units of ENL services. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At PS 234, we are currently implementing Response to Intervention which includes the ELL population of students. We have shifted to the self-contained and push-in models where our ELL population is service within their classroom in many cases among the general population of students. Our ELLs are afforded equal access to the core curriculum in all subject areas. The RTI model aims at identifying students who are in need of extra support in addition to the core instruction. All students , including Ells and its subgroups are intitally assessed utilizing a universal screener to determine the students individual needs. They are then provided with tailored instruction as necessary according to the tier that the data indicates they should be placed in. In ELA , the RTI model is implemented by an ENL licensed pedagogue who provides targeted instruction to individual or small group of students who have the same or similar needs. This is done within each tier of instruction in the RTI model. ELL students who are also identified as being at risk in Social Studies, Science, or Social Studies, will receive targeted instruction by an ENL certified pedagogue who modifies the lessons as necessary to meet the students individual needs according to the tier the data indicates they should be placed in. To further provide native language supports, our population of ELLs, are provided with: native language libraries, bilingual thesaurus, and Spanish bilingual Go Math textbooks. Students are also grouped with other students, classroom teachers and other staff members that speak their native language. We support our ELLs under the RTI structure; design research-based instruction that is linguistically and culturally appropriate for ELLs; best use assessments to guide daily instruction (Tier I); and best design instructional routines and interventions in Tiers II and III. Our Tier I, Core Instruction, includes instruction that supports the needs of our ELLs. Teachers design lessons with language objcetives throughout all content areas. Teachers implictly and explicitly teach vocabulary used in content area studies and read alouds. Students have multiple exposures to new vocabulary and through Collaborative Conversations, students have opportunities to use those words in context. We provided targeted instruction to meet individual students’ needs. For students who are in Transitioning and Expanding levels of proficiency, our literacy data reveals comprehension and phonics instructions needs to be strengthened, we use The Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention System as a small-group, supplementary literacy intervention as published results (2009-10) demonstrate that LLI is an effective short-term 9  intervention for struggling readers who are also classified as English Language Learners. We also use double dose of Reading Reform in English and double dose of Estrellita in Spanish. In Math, teachers use the Go Math assessments to identify and target specific skills/ strand to focus in on and provide small group instruction with progress monitoring. Additional interventions include: Targeting Beginning ELLs (Grades K-2) Group Size: 5-8 students *Target Long-Term/At-Risk ELLs (Grades 3-5) Group Size: 5-8 students •S.P.I.R.E – (Grades 2-5) targets low and at-risk students (ELLs included). Sessions are three times a week for 30 minutes with a 5:1 ratio. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? PS 234Q staff will focus on bridging "Advanced Literacy Instruction." We ensure instructional time and comprehensive growth for ELLs in the curricula areas by endorsing an all day data-driven Inclusion ENL/Sheltered instruction push-in program model, that is in accordance with CR Part 154 mandates. Teachers of ELLs follow rigorous CCLS aligned curricula to aid our students' development of the target language and to close the achievement gap. Students will be supported to: Develop the foundational knowledge, content and conceptual, that they in order to access and generate a range of texts through multimedia pathways. Teachers will focus on 5 different linguistic Hallmarks that work with a variety of text feature big ideas and rich content. Students will actively work with texts, multiple texts, read single topics or concepts, work on multi-faceted engaging abstract topics. Lessons will lend themselves to higher order discussions, appropriate tiered vocabulary exposure, engaging ELLs interests and perspectives, talk/discuss to build language and knowledge, use core academic vocabulary across texts. Advanced Literacy Instruction will work with a variety of texts that feature big ideas and rich content; use extended writing as a platform to build language and knowledge, talk and discuss to build language and knowledge, study a small set of high-utility vocabulary words needed to master language and content; use schoolwide protocols to support reading, writing, speaking, and writing for ELLs. We are currently conducting supplemental professional development that include The Advanced Literacy Program. This helps us to instruct our teachers in implementing the program as well as to train them in strategies that will help teachers in providing targeted instruction to ELL students within all areas of study. Within these we will continue to develop the RTI model for intervention in areas of needs. For example, we will provide teachers with the knowledge of each Tier in RTI and how to assess, identify and place each student in the appropriate Tier. Furthermore, teachers will be taught to select the right intervention in accordance with the specific students' needs. This implementation will be coordinated with the Advanced Literacy Program. This approach will also incorporate Guided Reading and Shared reading to provide ELL students with the tool to practice the four modalities, speaking, listening, reading and writing. We also plan to have intervention programs to target ELLs in ELA, math and other content areas. ELLs learning needs are identified and groupings and strategies are applied to meet these needs. For example, in order to provide content area optimum support, ENL teachers may push into a student’s science class once a week. Moreover, during guided reading push-in instruction, ENL teachers may also select to make use of guided reading books that are aligned to a certain science unit of study. Our school offers Math AIS, ELA, and Science AIS supplemental services. The after school program also focuses on reading comprehension and writing through a thematic approach. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs makes use of the following materials: MONDO content area-based, Balanced Literacy Programs (Let’s Talk About It; Let’s Sing About It). Intervention providers make use of charts, realia, manipulatives, and other ENL approaches that support language development and in ELA, math and other content areas. Additional interventions include: 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs have access to all school programs and receive equal access to art, drama classes dance, gym, trips, school events, and extra-curricula activities. We offer after school for all of our ELLs throughout the school year. The program will target ELLs in 0  grades 3-5, specifically targeting students who did not score Commanding in the LAB-R or NYSESLAT. It will also provide additonal instructional opportunities for ELLs who are at risk, or are potential long-term ELLs not meeting the mandated improvement; nor have acquired language proficiency. Educational activities will include the use of Literacy and Mathematics. The program will include an oral language development component, and extensive writing activities to improve comprehension and writing skills. All ELLs have access to laptops and a computer laboratory. ELLs conduct internet based research, create power-point presentations and writing reports, make use of audio listening and phonics development interactive activities, access websites in teacher guided lessons that require research. All classrooms from grades Pre-K though Grade 5 are equipped with Promethean boards. Software (Math and Literacy) programs are employed. Content area instruction is taught with an interdisciplinary approach. Content instruction is also infused into our ELA (Ready-Gen) and Mathematics (Go-Math) curriculum. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. PS 234 has installed a promethean board in every classroom in order to provide teachers with a technological tool which allows them access to an infinite amount of information. This allows for the implementation of highly effective lessons inclusive of visual, auditory, TPR, and hands on activities. Furthermore, PS 234 has purchased computer carts which includes a lap top for each student within a classroom. We have created a computer center within each classroom to provide the students with the opportunity to further develop their technological skill as they practice their academic work. This use of technology is geared toward helping our students, including ELLS, to be college and career ready. _______________________________________________________________ ENL and Classroom Teachers make use of classroom technology and ELLs opt to use to continue tasks at leisure or in time for the afforded technology. -STUDENTS PUBLISH WORK -RECORD AND EDIT AND PREMIER SHORT FILMS -PEAK interest and teach valuable professional skills -STUDENTS LISTEN TO PODCASTS -THEY USE IPADS -I-READY iN SCHOOL AND AT HOME A Diagnostic for reading and mathematics that pinpoints student needs down to the sub-skill level, and ongoing progress monitoring shows whether students are on track to achieve end-of-YEAR TARGETS. -MY ON IN SCHOOL AND AT HOME 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ELL students identified as spanish speakers are provided with the Spanish NYSITELL to determine their level of proficiency in their native language. The ELL population of students is also provided with native language libraries in all the classrooms at PS 234. This to provide the academic support the ELL students need as they work to achieve proficiency in english. During, content area, testing the students are provided with glossaries in their native language as well as translation services when required. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. At PS 234, teaching strategies, questioning, and routines are strategically differentiated so that all learners, including students with disabilities and ELLS, have multiple entry points, supports, and extensions into the curricula according to grade and language levels. New understandings are built on previous understandings. For example, an Emerging ELL student who understands how to compose sentences is getting ready to create paragraphs. Therefore, the ELL instructor modifies the lesson to provide this student with support in paragraph writing/formation. All required services a resources provided are grade appropriate. All required services support and resources correspond to ELL’s ages and grade levels. Materials are age and grade level 1  appropriate and support materials that correspond with the entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding proficiency levels of the overall NYSESLAT proficiency rating. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Sharing the building with PS 234 is Intermediate School 235 (IS 235). This affords us the opportunity to engage in productive discussions on how to better serve our student population which includes our ELL students. Each month, both administrations holds meetings to share ideas common ideas and learning goals for the building to be shrine of language learning as well as a welcoming environment for all our all children but specially for our ELLs. Additionally, we share our calendar of events to include multicultural activities that bring ample opportunities for our ELL students to have interactive encounters. During these encounters ELLs can share their experiences and have the chance to meet with students from their culture and also interact with other students and children from different multicultural background. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Prior to beginning of the school year, PS 234Q implements numerous activities to assist newly enrolled ELLs. ENL staff members recommend useful English language development software such as MyOn and Fundations or websites that facilitate second language acquisition. Teachers are provided with strategies and methodologies that foster language development and give insights or a better understanding into the world of the second language learner. ELLs are buddied-up or placed in classrooms with fluent students whom may be of assistance in the event that the language is not spoken by the classroom teacher or other pupils. Parents of in coming ELLs are provided with an orientation and school tour of our facilities. Parents are informed of the various programs available at our school. These include: after school, dance, music, chess club, book club and ENL the Title 3 Program, among others. Our parent coordinators as well as the school nurse provide workshops through out the year where parents of new ELL students receive information of activities and programs ,available in the school and neighborhood, which can benefit their children educationally and socially. This ensure the exposure of these students to cultural and educational activities in this road of language acquisition. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives are not applicable to PS 234Q yet we offer the ELL students the opportunity to select reading and other materials in their native languages as we have provided each classrooms in our school with native language libraries. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL department offers Professional development to school’s staff. During this training the staff is provided with information on how ELL students are identified and placed. ENL teachers will also conduct training, for assistant principals, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, secretaries, parent coordinator and teachers working with ELLs to provide them with the knowledge of implementing ENL strategies in their classroom. In addition they will be trained in utilizing the ENL components of the Advanced Literacy Program and Ready Gen. During these professional development sessions, additional training is provided to teachers to enhance teaching the content areas to ELL students while incorporating the Common Core Standards in their lessons. PS 234Q Professional Development Program focuses on providing teachers with scaffolding and differentiated instruction strategies for teaching English Language Learners. A tremendous focus is placed on techniques that best prepare our ELLs students in meeting and exceeding the NYC and NYS performance and learning standards as well as increasing achievement scores on city and state wide tests. The ENL teachers in the After School Program, as well as monolingual teachers receive the training necessary to ensure the use of ENL strategies within the programs and all areas of interaction with ELL students. Participating teachers are paid the trainee rate and teacher trainers are paid at the per session rate. These sessions will be facilitated by ELL licensed personnel and administrators. The teachers will receive 12 hours of ENL training and will meet and exceed the 7.5 hours mandated by the NYS Education Department. The participating teachers and other staff members will receive 6 sessions of professional development during days of allocated in the school calendar. The staff members attending these sessions will receive certificates and agendas indicating their participation and the number of hours obtained. The ENL department will maintained a record of attendance signed by the participating members. Additionally copies of the agenda will be filed. Topics that will be addressed during these professional development sessions are as follow: 1. October 18, 2017: Two 2-hour professional development sessions will be devoted to Scaffolding across the Content Areas: Types of Scaffolding. 2. November 15, 2017: One 2-hour professional development session will be devoted to Differentiated Instructional Strategies and implementation of the Balanced Literacy program, in each area of studies. 3. December 20, 2017: One 2-hour professional development session will be devoted to the strategies needed to prepare ELLs to meet the city and state standards and to gain a clear understanding of the NYSESLAT. 4. January 10, 2018: One 2-hour professional development session will be devoted to the instructional strategies needed to increase Native Language literacy skills and to prepare for the ELA. 5. February 7, 2018: One 2-hour professional development session will be devoted to mathematical instructional strategies to develop and enhance students’ skills and performance on the city and state assessments.Paste response to questions 1-3 here 6. March 14, 2018: One 2 hour session of professional development in ELL RTI. Additionally our teachers will be instructed to focus and increase the cognitive language skills of ELL students. This along with vocabulary development in English and the content areas. The aim of this approach being the smooth transition of these students to the higher level of education in Junior high school as well as high school. The ELL students then be able to function without any difficulties in the new setting. The participating staff members will also be trained in preparing the students in transitioning from elementary school to middle school. Classroom trips will focus in visiting middle schools to give the students exposure to their future educational environment. Additionally the staff will be exposed to activities aimed at preparing the students as well as their parents in selecting an appropriate middle school. The teachers participating in these professional development are provided with agendas or certificates indicating their participation and the number of hours of PD received. The provider of the PD also maintains records of the participating teachers and the hours accumulated by each individual teacher in the ENL files binder. 3  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional development activities in our school clearly contribute to our efforts to promote the academic achievement of English language learners. Professional development activities in our school take into account the educational, linguistic and cultural needs of our English language learner population. Our school staff engages in meaningful professional development activities on an ongoing basis to discuss the progress being made by our English language learners. Weekly Professional development activities are schedule in at PS 234Q, The School of Performing Arts and Technology. These include 15% that Address ENL topics that teachers find useful in their quest to educate our ELL population of students. Our ENL certified teachers receive additional Professional development in ENL topics. These additional professional development, for ENL certified teachers, add up to 50% of their total PD hours being in the ENL realm of studies. These Professional Developments are conducted by highly qualified personnel that possesses the knowledge and are certified in ENL education. Records of these professional developments are maintains through the filing of Agendas as well as signing sheets that are kept to track the participation of our pedagogues in these important activities designed to aide them in providing a world class education for our ELL population of students as well as all the students in our school community. The teachers participating in these professional development are provided with certificates indicating their participation and the number of hours of PD received. The provider of the PD also maintains records of the participating teachers and the hours accumulated by each individual teacher in the ENL files binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At PS 234Q, The School of Performing Arts and Technology, accommodations are provided for the parents to be active participants in their children's education. We have provided teachers with the extended day time allocation to set up individual meetings with the parents of ELL students to informed them of their children progress as well as to assist them in becoming active participant in helping their children in their educational journey. For these meetings translators are provided to assist the parents to better understand their children need and successes. This as well as to answer any other questions needing to be answered. During the year the parents of new comers are also provided with similar conferences in English and the native language as identified in the home language survey. Most of the translations are done by certified teachers in our school who speak a second language or by translators provided by the Department of Education. Additional individual conferences are held according to student needs in order to collaborate in enhancing children’s language acquisition needs. Parents are also able to visit their children's classrooms and teachers during the first Thursday of the month. Parents are able to observe lessons and their children's participation within the classroom setting. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. PS 234Q, The School of Performing Arts and Technology, The parents of ELL students are invited to participate in many activies designed to seek their involvement in their children education. Parents have been assigned with a room where parents activies and needs are addressed on a daily basis by the school's parent coordinator as well as other members of our school communitty. ENL classes for parents and adult members of the community are offered, during the school week, throughout the year. These classes are design and teach English to parents of ELL students. They will then be able to become more involved in their children's education. The parent coordinator in collaboration with the 4  ENL department, conduct a series of workshops geared towards giving them an understanding on how to help their children become better learners. The workshops include Literacy through the Arts. In these workshops children and their parents are invited to participate in activities designed to bring awareness of how parent and child can practice literacy skills while doing fun activities. Another workshop conducted is the Homework Help. In this workshop parents are given the opportunity to be trained, along side their children, in helping their child with homework. Additional workshop include the introduction to the Ready Gen Curriculum as well as the Go math curriculum. The programs are explained to parents and are adviced on what the expectations are and the role they should play in the implementation of these curriculums. Other workshops, such as Getting Your Child Ready for the NYSESLAT, provide the parents with knowledge about the testing procedures and how their children can become better at taking tests. The communication with parents allowed us to identify the needs of our parent community. We were able to develop the Homework Help workshops through which parents are trained in helping their children with their homework. Additionally we conduct the Ready Gen and Go Math workshops to address the parents concern with the new curriculum and CCLS alignment. On going home-school communication is a policy at PS 234Q and the doors are open to the development of other workshops and activities that help to support the ELL students' educational needs. This as well as to assist their parents in supporting their effort in obtaining a world class education. The process of identifying parents needs is on going through out the school year. Any questions or concerns are, by parents, promptly addressed by our school personnel and resolutions are seeked and obtained to address the needs at hand. Our language translation and interpretation plan includes the funds and strategies for providing parents with translation and interpretation in any language requested. Our staff who are speakers of other languages are if and when available provide these services to our community. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dora Danner, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 234Q School DBN: 30Q234 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dora Danner Title Principal Peggy Mouzakitis Assistant Principal Jabari Brown Parent Coordinator Jose Guerrero ENL/Bilingual Teacher Rebecca Staley Parent N/A N/A N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Olga Papadapoulos School Counselor N/A NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Rolando Perez Other ENL teacher NA NA Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06-28-2017 06-28-2017 06-28-2017 06-28-2017 06-28-2017 06-28-2017 06-28-2017 06-28-2017 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q234 School Name: PS234Q Superintendent: D30 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jose N/A N/A N/A Guerrero ENL coordinator NA NA NA NA NA NA Yes NA NA NA Yes NA NA NA * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At PS 234Q we gather data from Home language Surveys and the blue emergency cards that are completed for our entire population of students. We also utilize the RCPL ATS Report to confirm the parents preferred language of communication. Additionally, Surveys are sent home with each child asking each parent's preferred oral and written language preferences. The survey responses are tallied and then filed in a binder. The data is shared with our staff in order to insure that the parents preferences are adhered to and they receive the services in the language they have requested. 8  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English, Spanish Arabic Albanian Bengali Chinese Croatian Urdu Punjabi Portuguese Polish Italian 493 74.925 477 96 29 0 27 3 0 2 2 2 1 1 14.59 4.41 0 4.1 0.46 0 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.15 0.15 98 36 1 33 3 1 2 2 2 1 1 72.49 14.89 5.47 015 5.02 0.46 .15 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.15 0.15 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families DOE School year calendar-September,NYS Testing Dates ,curriculum overviews September 2018 Testing information, promotion in doubt letters. September 2018 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Written translation needs for Spanish, Bengali, and Arabic, when necessary, are sent to the Translation Unit of the NYC Department of Education. These are the four major languages in our school. They translate the letters not 9  NA NA NA September 2018 December 2018 January 2019 NA NA NA provided by the DOE in these languages as well as others if requested by parents. These letters inform parents of important testing dates, parent workshops, and school events and closures. To ensure the timely receipt of the documents, We send them to the unit with ample time.We attach a statement stating the importance of the document and the need for a timely translation. We provide the same service to parents in other languages when requested. NA NA NA 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide PTC' Meetings PTC meetings PTC meetings September 2018 November 2018 March 2019 May 2019 September - June 2018-2019 Septermber-June guidance counselor calls, 2017-2018 attendance calls, September -June 2018-2019 parent workshops. September-June NA NA 2018-2019 NA NA interpretation service(s)? Oral interpretation needs will be met in a timely fashion by in house staff fluent in the major languages as determined by the home language survey statistics. Oral interpretation will be provided through the utilization of the "talk technologies" interpretation devices during parent workshops and PTA meetings. In addition, the ENL staff will provide person to person interpretation services during registration procedures, phone calls home, IEP meetings, Parent Teacher Conferences, and when immediate parental needs arise. Additionally we will contact the DOE language and interpretation unit if we are unable to provide this service. We will have them provide translation and interpretation in any given language for parents that seek these services. NA NA 0  NA NA NA 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The P.S 234's school safety plan has an included provision ensuring that parents in need of language assistance will not be prevented from reaching the schools administrative offices due to the language barrier. Our phone system directory includes greetings and oral directions in all our major languages. We conduct an staff survey in which we identify members that can provide translation and interpretation services in case of emergencies. We have also equipped our office staff with the access to phone numbers to reach to the translations and interpretation unit. Through this unit we can provide parents the information and services in a language they understand. Parents are also provided with the protocol in case of emergencies in all major languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. P.S. 234 Q informs both staff and parents of the availability of translation and interpretation services. We post notifications on the school's main entrance, in the main office, in the parent coordinator's office and other conspicuous places. Our staff as well as parents receive written notifications explaining the rights parents/guardians have to receive translation and interpretation services (provided that their primary levy constitutes 10-20 or more of the languages spoken at family homes). We also hold a professional development sessions in which our staff is provided with the information necessary to comply with the parents language requests. Our language Access Coordinator turkeys all the information they have receive from DOE experts and explain all the steps necessary in obtain translation and interpretation services if not available in our school. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) To ensure that parents are provided with translation and interpretation services PS234Q sends out the notification letters found in the DOE website, in all major languages,. This to inform them of the availability of these services. These letters are sent in the parents' chosen language of communication. We also post the notification poster in our school website. This allows parents to read about the availability of these services in a language they understand. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 1  We will send a survey in September asking parents for their preferred written and spoken language preferences and will try to accommodate all requests.The Parent Coordinator checks the blue emergency cards and the surveys and keep the information in a binder to use during the year. The PC will hold a meeting with parents of all cultures/languages asking them for best practice ideas. This will include a focus group of all the cultures represented in our school. The feedback obtained will be used to inform us of how our programs are working and how we can better assist our families. We revisit and adjust our language translation and interpretation plan as needs arise through out the school year. 2 
