2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 29Q238 School Name: I.S. 238 - SUSAN B. ANTHONY ACADEMY Principal: PETER LEDDY 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information I.S. 238 Susan B. Anthony 29Q238 342900010238 6-8 School Number (DBN): 88-15 182 nd Street, Hollis, NY 11423 718-297-9821 718-658-5288 Phone Number: Fax: Peter Leddy pleddy@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Peter Leddy Elizabeth Leder Nathalie Duporte Email Address: Parents’ Association President: Chrisovalantis Gailas SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Erika Williams Hero Tamakloe District Information Geographical District: 29 Beverly Mitchell Superintendent: 90-11 191 Street, Hollis, NY 11423 Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: bmitche2@schools.nyc.gov 718-217-7740 718-217-7739 Phone Number: Queens South FSC: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Marlene Wilkes 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd, Rego Park, NY mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-348-2988 Phone Number: 718-391-6156 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Chris Gailas- Designee Elizabeth Leder Nathalie Duporte Erika Williams MS MS Kathleen Comack Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) SuezetteKirlew KristieRecine Marie Missial Lorena Contreras Debbie Hafeez Member/ UFT Member/UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? To be a well-known urban middle school that graduates students with advanced academic skills. Section 4: SCEP Overview 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. I.S. 238 is a diverse middle school consisting of over 1,00 students in the Hollis section of Queens, New York. I.S. 238 is one of the few remaining large middle schools in the district with an enrollment over 1,000. The school building is ideally located on Hillside Avenue, a major street with multiple transportation options, the school services students from directly in the community, as well as many students from Cambria Heights, Jamaica, and Queens Village. Our mission is to provide quality instruction to learners of all abilities. In the 2017 - 2018 school year we offered Regents courses in Algebra and Living Environment to all 8th grade students. Students achieved a 52 percent passing rate in the NYS Algebra Common Core Regents Exam and a 49 percent passing rate in the NYS Living Environment Regents. Additionally, students entering the 7th grade in the 2018 - 2019 school year will begin preparing for Algebra in their math classes We have increased our Arts offerings to students. We currently have three Visual Arts teacher, two music teachers, and a dance teacher for the 2018 - 2019 school year. Additionally, we utilize Google Class as a way to better serve the needs of our students. We created the I.S. 238 Summer Reading Challenge to address the regression of student performance during the summer. Incoming 6th graders, and current 7th and 8th grade students, are given Google Class accounts and digital assignments to complete during the summer. On June 18, 2018 we had a book fair in which over 60 families attended to receive copies of books to read during the summer. Our focus this year will be: 1. Increasing student proficiency in Math 2. Increasing ENL & SWD student proficiency in ELA & Math 3. Moving students with disabilities into the least restrictive environment 4. Increasing parental involvement 5. Increasing teacher to teacher trust 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  Bilingual students - support staff that speak the same language (school aides, paras, counselors) 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Received a well developed in 1.4 Learning Environment from the end of year 2017-2018 PPO. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q238 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1404 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 120 120 20 19 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 83 75 20 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 83.1% % Reduced Lunch 16.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 4.2% 28.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.9 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 32.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities NO NO YSH NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS YSH NO YSH NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 81 80 91.0% 6.3% 13.4% 36.7% 28.6% 4.6% 8 18% 6.8 25.8% 6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO NO N/A NO NO NO YSH N/A NO NO NO NO N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X x X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs:  32% of students are proficient in ELA as per the 2017-2018 NYS ELA Common Core exam  25% of students are proficient in Math as per the 2017-2018 NYS Math Common Core exam    Development of a uniform system of interpreting formative and summative assessments Improvement in rigorous instruction Increase collaboration among teachers Strengths  Partnership with MSQI  Use of IReady to improve assessments  Principal participation in the ELL Leadership Learning Series sponsored by the NYC DOE Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Improve mathematics instruction to increase student proficiency on the NYS Math exam to 29% for the 2018-2019 school year, through participation in the Queens South Field Support Center professional development series on Math instruction, participation in the Queens South Field Support Center initiatives, implementing the use of Go-Math in grade 6th and 7th, implementation of the I-Ready assessment program, and strengthen students’ critical thinking skills through an infusion of the eight standards for mathematical practice throughout the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Assistant Principals, Peer Instructional Coaches, Guidance Counselors 9/27/18 - 6/30/19 Principal, Assistant Principals, Peer Instructional Coaches, Teachers Assistant Principal & Math Coach 10/1/18 - 6/30/19 Principal, Assistant, Principal, Teachers Teachers 10/4/2018 - 5/13/2019  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We have provided 6th and 7th grade students with 10 periods of Math. They will receive 5 required Math classes titled Core and they will receive an additional 5 periods titled “What I need” or WIN periods. During WIN periods students will put theory into practice and address issues they need assistance. 8th grade students will receive a total of 8 periods of Algebra. Monthly visits from the Queens South Field Support Center(QSFSC) Instructional Lead to facilitate Teacher Team Planning sessions with the 6th grade teachers. Attendance at professional learning sessions tthroughout the 2018-2019 school year Team of Special Education Math teachers and Math AP will attend six sessions of Data-based Individualization (DBI) for Students Experiencing Difficulty with Mathematics (K-8) throughout the year. All 9/5/18 - 6/30/19 6th grade Math Teachers Assistant Principal & Math Coach 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Attendance at Essential Practices for ELLs Instruction in the Math Classroom professional learning series 210 ENL Students 10/27/2018 - 6/30/19 Principal, Assistant Principals Professional development sessions on teaching students that are identified as ENL and SWD ENL & SWD students Communication through School Messenger phone system, Parent Coordinator emails, monthly Parent Association meetings, backpacked letters home, mailings, and Parent Coordinator monthly calendars. Monthly workshops for parents on education issues. All parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 9/7/18 - 6/30/19 9/7/18 - 6/30/19 Principal, Assistant Principals, All teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Relief from teaching to attend professional development sessions during the school day. Paid coverages to substitutes and/or teachers covering classes. Per session for staff to attend professional development sessions outside of school hours as per CBA. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Baseline performance assessments will be given before November 1, 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Baseline and Mid Year Benchmark exams. 1st quarter marking period student work reviews Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x X x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We were below the city average of Support Environment on the Learning Environment Survey, 64% vs. 74%. Teachers struggled with the new rules regarding the discipline code and how students received suspensions. We applied and received the ESD/SVP Grant to assist our students with violence prevention and to also instruct them on how to channel their aggression. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Increase the positive response rate for Supportive Environment on the 2018 - 2019 NYCDOE Learning Environment survey to 75% percent, which was the city average from the previous year, by adding a third dean of students, offering 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  more support services for students, such as drama therapist, and implementing monthly positive behavior system strategies every month in all classrooms. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The school was awarded the Extended School Day/School Violence Prevention Grant. The program will begin September 2016 and is a five year grant. The grant has several programs.  The Leadership Program will serve 240 students doing Violence Prevention programming 6 hours per day 2 days per week during the school day. 240 students that have been identified as having a need for the program 9/7/18 – 6/30/19 Principal, Assistant Principals, Deans, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors As part of the ESD/SVP Grant there will be a series of clubs created for after school, including SBA Girls Rock, which will focus on issues facing female students, and SBA Gents, which will focus on issues facing male students. 240 students 9/7/18 – 6/30/19 The use of Community Associate to assist with parental outreach, specifically targeting the parents of ENL students and Immigrant students. Providing students with school expectations and communicating those expectations to parents. Informing staff of the issues that occur and the consequences of the actions for the students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All students, parents, and school staff. 9/7/18 – 6/30/19 Principal, Assistant Principals, Deans, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Bilingual Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Deans, Parent Coordinator, Community Associate Guidance Counselors How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  The school will continue with a third dean for the 2018 - 2019 school year, assigning one dean per grade. The deans will loop with their grade assignment to build solid relationships with the student and families during their three years at I.S. 238. Guidance Counselor's caseloads were changed from grade level to students' last names so the counselor can work with the student and family over their three years at I.S. 238. The ESD/SVP grant will provide per session for teachers and a supervisor for after school programs. Additionally, the ESD/SVP grant will provide for a social worker for 2.5 days per week. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. OORS reports will be monitored for infractions that contradict a supportive environment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS will be monitored on a monthly basis to identify trends in behavior. Spikes in teacher removals, principal suspensions, and superintendent suspensions will be monitored. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Pedagogy  Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teacher, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products.  Across classrooms teachers used station learning and group work as consistent entry points into learning tasks. In a seventh grade social studies class, the teacher used the do now activity to create instructional groups with differentiated task. Student engaged in a carousel activity to analyze text, pictures, and political cartoons related to the French and Indian War. Students used class notes from previous lessons along with the text and graphic organizer to answer the essential question, “What sequence of events led to the colonies declaring independence from Great Britain?” In another group, students used pictures and maps showing the control of land in North America before and after the war to support their assertions. The majority of students were able to respond appropriately to the questions and cite text evidence. While there were consistent entry point across classrooms, there was no evidence of strategic entry points. In a seventh grade class, students were given chart paper and markers to create a dramatic plot for the first four chapters of the text Percy Jackson. However, English Language Learners were not provided with the additional scaffolds needed for them to complete the task, as such, while there were scaffolds in this lesson, they were not strategic to the needs of the learners. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24   A team of science teachers will participate in the Urban Advantage program and attend professional development sessions on September 25 and October 4, 2018, share resources with other teachers, and also provide workshops to building staff. Additionally, the results of the Framework for Great Schools Report for the 2017 - 2018 school year indicated the teachers were not satisfied with the quality of the professional development they received for the year, primarily only 55% of teachers say that they had opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools on professional development Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers would have developed and implemented 5 units of study with instructional routines that support discussion strategies, student writing, and oral language development. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers have 80 minutes of Professional Development every Monday after school, 2:20PM to 3:45PM Teachers 9/5/18 – 6/30/19 Teachers will be given opportunities to attend professional development workshops at offsite locations. Continued implementation of the Imagine Learning. Teachers will attend professional development when it becomes available. ENL teachers 9/5/18 – 6/30/19 Parents will be notified as to the topics their children are learning in the classes through letters, conferences, YouTube videos, and Pupil Path (online application.) Parents 9/5/18 – 6/30/19 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principals, ENL Teachers Principal, Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principals, ENL Teachers Principal, Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principals, ENL Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Open school nights. Tuesday Parent Encounter afternoons Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Diem subs will cover the classes of teachers attending off site workshops. Per session will be provided for professional development and teacher team meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administrative review of units of study and classroom observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Ratings of Domain 3 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Enhancing teacher instructional practices is complex and challenging. For the past three years, professional development opportunities were heavily facilitated by administration and peer instructional coaches. Administrators and coaches conducted numerous professional development opportunities in the form of inquiry teams, professional learning communities, classroom inter visitations, learning walks, lunch and learns, interdisciplinary teams, and outside workshops. Developing teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs of how students learn best (as informed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching) as well as ensuring that teachers align and adjust their instructional practices to ongoing assessment continues to be a challenge. This year, we received a Quality Review rating of proficient in the 1.2 and 2.2 instructional core categories. After a thorough analysis of Advance teacher observation data, Quality Review findings, and survey results, the data suggests that in order to improve teacher practice, school leaders need to build teacher leadership capacity in which teachers assume leadership roles in facilitating professional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers at I.S. 238/The Susan B. Anthony Academy will engage in meaningful target professional development grounded in the Danielson Framework for Teaching led by teacher leaders, resulting in a 10% increase in the item statement “Quality of Professional Development” under the subtest “Collaborative Teachers.” 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A comprehensive 2018 – 2019 professional development calendar developed by teachers. Teachers and Staff Sept 2018 - June 2019 ongoing Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrators, teachers, instructional coaches, teacher leaders, specialists Administrators will encourage and support teacher leaders that facilitate professional development Teachers and Staff Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administrators Administrators in collaboration with teacher leaders will clearly define professional development “mandates,” “needs,” and “desires” grounded in Advance data prior to administering professional development needs surveys to staff and faculty 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Ongoing Teachers and Staff Sept 2018 to June 2019 Administrators Ongoing How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Use funds to contract with speakers from Creative Connections, Educators for Student Success. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, all teachers at I.S. 238 will engage in professional development grounded in the Danielson Framework for Teaching led by teacher leaders, resulting in a 5% increase in "Quality of Professional Development" feedback survey developed by teacher leaders. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Quality of Professional Development” feedback survey developed by teacher leaders Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. D Developing strong family ties is an approach that I.S. 238/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  The Susan B. Anthony Academy does well, however, we can still improve. At I.S. 238, “strong family ties” is defined as a school community where all stakeholders feel they can trust each other, loved, empowered, and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  valued. While 91% of parents trust their child’s teacher, and 96% of parents feel that they can trust the principal, we aim to improve our family ties in the area of home-school connections. Parent-teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  conference data suggests that parents do not have a firm understanding of what their child should be learning each marking period. We aim to address the disconnect between school instruction and hom 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  e learning supports. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all I.S. 238 parents and guardians will have access to math, science, social studies, or literacy pacing calendars and/or class syllabi, or homework assignments posted on Google Classroom or Skedula as measured by a 10% decrease in parent complaints recorded in post parent teacher conference concern logs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams will collaborate to develop a pacing calendar or class syllabus by content area/grade for each unit of study Parents, teachers, students Guidance counselor and the parent coordinator will encourage and support parents of target students to be actively engaged in their child's learning by informing them of upcoming school events/activities in a timely and effective fashion Parents and students Improve lines of communication for the purpose of disseminating information to parents by utilizing the RoboCall feature, translation services for both verbal and written, monthly calendar, school newsletter, and updating the school's website Parents, teachers, Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Sept 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing Sept 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing Administrators, teachers, instructional coaches, teacher leaders, parent coordinator, guidance counselor, SLT Administrators, teachers, instructional coaches, teacher leaders, parent coordinator, guidance counselors, SLT Sept 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing Administrators, teachers, instructional coaches, teacher leaders, parent coordinator, guidance counselors, SLT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Sports & Arts in Schools Foundation Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Using CAASS system to contact parents and record student attendance Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019 (the second parent teacher conference), all I.S. 238 parents and guardians will have access to math, science, social studies, or literacy pacing calendar and/or class syllabus, or homework assignments posted on Google Classroom or Skedula as measured by a 5% decrease in parent complaints recorded in post parent teacher conference concern logs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Post parent teacher conference concern logs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students Mathematics All students Science All students Social Studies Grades 6 and 7 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) IEP, staff recommendations, and as presented by students. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) 5 classes per week for 6 th and 7 th graders. 4 classes per week for 8 th graders 5 classes per week for grades 6, 7, and 8. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day During the school day Regular class During the school day Regular class During the school day Services are provided throughout the school day in group sessions and also one to one counseling/intervention All services are conducted during the school day Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Strategic reading periods – WIN: What I Need Period. Math enrichment periods using computer based programs such as IXL All students are programmed with an additional 45 minutes of Science every week. All students are programmed with an additional 45 minutes of Social Studies instruction every week. Three guidance counselors, three speech teachers, 1 social worker, and one psychologist, each have a caseload of assigned mandated counselor, related services, and targeted 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  interventions as needed 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 186 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Assistance with school supplies, access to services, school uniforms Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The principal utilizes the New York City Department of Education Teach Finder web application which is maintained by the Office of Teacher Recruitment. The site lists candidate qualifications and allows for the filtering of candidates based on the meeting of advanced selection criteria and other categories. We attend DOE hiring fairs, college fairs, utilize DOE tools, and work with universities to gather resumes and interview our prospective teachers. We require prospective teachers to conduct a demo lesson and attend our new teacher orientation prior to the start of school. We support the retention of our teachers through continual professional development strategies both in teams and through individualized support as needed. The principal and the assistant principal works one-to-one with each teacher to identify areas of support and next steps with the teachers and create professional development opportunities as needed to demonstrate teacher growth and ensure that our teachers feel supported. We provide teachers with organizational supports such as calendars, and newsletters that keep them well informed. All teachers have access to supplies, computers, and state of the art technology (with trainings) so that their pedagogy is enhanced and supports all learners. We train teachers in behavioral strategies that support learners. We are committed to retaining our teachers and encourage them to participate in all areas of school life and we create team building events. We provide tenure information for our untenured teachers. As required, new teachers are matched with mentors. We utilize network supports, as well, to identify high quality professional development opportunities and provide our teachers with current and research based models of pedagogy. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All staff receives professional development that enables our students to meet Common Core State Standards. We employ the following strategies: ● Monday 80 minute professional development sessions provided by Assistant Principals, Peer Instructional Coaches, and teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  ● Engaging staff in PDs that focus supports for our subgroups ● Deepening teachers’ understanding of using data to focus classroom instructional practice ● Participating in the Middle School Quality Initiative Word Generation Professional Development sessions ● Participating in the English Language Learners Institute sponsored by the NYC Department of Education Office of English Language Learners and Harvard Graduate School of Education ● Creating a structured and research based school Professional Development plan. ● Vertical and horizontal supervision of grades and content areas by school leaders ● Conducting regular instructional rounds and the full implementation of Danielson’s Framework for Teaching which informs teacher needs and tracks progress Implementation of weekly Instructional Cabinet where we continually monitor, assess, and revise our professional development plan as needed. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not TA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not TA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NO Pre-K 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  A Measures of Student Learning Committee was formed in June 2015. The committee will meet three times during the summer and present their selections to the staff at the September 9, 2015 Chancellor’s Conference Day. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 771,030.00 16971 242939 0 26,744.00 33230 8,632,247.00 X x x x x x x Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 53 5c 5e x x x 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. I.S. 238 Susan B. Anthony Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students I.S. 238 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other people and property; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: The purpose of the Direct Instruction Supplemental Program is to offer additional support for struggling ENL students, who are identified after analyzing data provided by EDAT reports. The supplemental Instruction consists in After school and Saturday academy. The After school Program runs every Wednesday and Thursday, from 2:30PM-4:30 PM. Saturday academy is scheduled every Saturday, from 9AM-12PM. The teachers that help with the Supplemental Programs are ENL and ELA certified. They use Imagine Learning as the main resource, together with its reports and printouts provided. Additionally they use Reading A-Z and non-fiction texts from NEWSELA for differentiating among different English levels. The grades served are 6th, 7th, and 8th grade. Teachers - $51.51 Guidance - $55.38 Supervisors - $52.84 The compensation for Direct instruction from service providers under the Title 111 Supplemental Plan will be based on number of days (Weekday-2:20PM - 4:20PM and Saturdays 9:00AM - 12 :00PM ) between October 5, 2018 and April 4, 2019 and the number of hours of instruction. The curriculum to be used for the Direct Instruction Supplemental Program will address the requirements of the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS); particularly for English Language Arts. Due attention will be given to the required rigor of the CCLS. The Danielson Framework will be used. Emphasis on literacy based on an integration of the literacy practices promoted by our English Language Arts department will be implemented. Integration of strategies offered via the MSQI initiative will also be integrated throughout the curriculum. The Professional Development sessions and Instructional supervision will focus on promoting scaffolding of difficult texts to address the needs and realities of the State Examinations. The computer-based programs that will be used to supplement the instruction, are mentioned below. The assessment aspect of the computer-based programs is of great curricular value. The assessments are built into the programs, are directly linked to the assignments, and are used to provide relevant, timely, and effective (research based) feedback for teachers and students. The curricula of these research based computer programs support differentiation of instruction. Students will be assessed to determine their "Just Right" or current lexile level. Their "instructional level" will then be determined based on their actual lexile levels. This type of curriculum has the potential to bring a guaranteed level of reading success. Teachers will supplement instruction with the use of Imagine Learning. Additionally, students will also have access to the MYON digital library, that will provide reading materials at their current individual lexile levels. Students will also be introduced to Google Classroom and participate in various digital projects. Students will also be introduced to the online curriculum 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information of i-ready that will be implemented in their Math Win and ELA win courses, leading to valuable data that will become available to teachers via their i-ready dashboard. Assessments will also play a role in instruction and planning and these assessments will be carefully prepared and offered during a scheduled planned time line. These assessments include those offered by the aforementioned MSQI initiative. The person providing the workshop sessions has ESL certification and is the "Lead ESL teacher" at Susan B. Anthony School - IS 238. There are 90 participating teachers. This number includes content area teachers and certified bilingual/ESL teachers who are also the Title 111 service providers. The duration (time) of each session is 1hour 55 minutes. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: ENL teachers provided professional development sessions for the content area teachers in the school during the entire school year. The ENL coordinator, Ms. Toma and the Social Studies teacher, Ms. Fiore attended CALI (the Content and Language Institute) for four sessions. Together with other two ENL teachers, Ms. Capetanos, and Ms. Contreras they presented and explained ENL strategies to content area teachers from the school during the mandated professional development hours. The rationale behind it is to help build a professional learning community in which teachers participate actively and reflect on teaching practices for English Language learners. The professional development for the school’s staff covered varied instructional techniques: · · · · Instructional Conversations The aforementioned ENL coordinator will also lead various instructional workshops and professional development opportunities, including the turnkey of resources and content attained from ENL PD opportunities provided via Field Support. A majority of these meetings will take place on Monday from 2:30-3:40 or Tuesday from 2:30-3:00 if necessary. ENL teachers and teachers within the cohort also have scheduled team meetings embedded within the weekly schedule at various periods throughout the school day. Agendas are produced and attendance sign in sheets are recorded for the aforementioned meetings and will be collected by our ENL coordinator, Ms. Toma. These professional development opportunities will provide various resources along with the opportunity to analyze artifacts and data that will drive and guide instructional planning. For example, the lowest third population will be identified via the EDAT and resource binders will become available for dissection and analysis during ENL team collaborations. The ENL teachers, including Ms. Toma will receive all notification regarding the ThinkWrite-Pair-Share Conversation Clubhouse Question Matrix Silent Dialogue 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part C: Professional Development posting of the various PD opportunities that become available by the Queens South FSC ENL team, including the newsletter that is emailed periodically. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Involving families in school activities is a major focus for all students, but especially for at risk ELL students. In order to plan more effective interventions, a collaborative relationship with the families should be established and maintained throughout the school year, as it is proved to increase academic achievement, and the overall behavior. In addition to the parent orientation during ELL identification that it’s done periodically, our school involved the parents of ELLs in varied activities. The Multicultural Night brought together different cultures, languages, and customs. Parents of ELLs were invited to be part of various trips that were organized every month by our school, offering them the opportunity to build learning experiences outside the building. Ms. Boone, the school’s Parent Coordinator organized various activities for the parents of ELLs. In October, she offered a parent workshop about High School Information. In January, she had a PTA meeting entitled “Paying for College”. Interpreters were used for both of these events for the parents that don’t speak English. She also celebrated the families of ELLs by offering breakfast and delivering important information in a morning workshop called “Parent Appreciation and Upcoming Info”. Specific dates and times are not available for particular events since they may not be organized and determined many months prior. Workshops for parents is based on the social needs and accommodations for parents as they assimilate towards various logistical requirements that are necessary for their children and themselves as residents/citizens. Parents have the availability of translation technology in the main office that they may use for communication with patrons in their own language. All communication that is shared via various electronic outlets (school website for example) are translated in various languages for the parents. Certain members of the school community are also identified based on the mastery of foreign languages (Bengali, Arabic, French-Creole, Greek) so they may be called upon to assist parents that visit the school in person. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name I.S. 238 - Susan B. Anthony Borough Queens School Number 238 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Peter Leddy Coach Arabelle Lacroix/AP ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Cornelia Toma Teacher/Subject Area Carlos Gonzalez/HLA Teacher/Subject Area Karrie Turner/Spanish Related-Service Provider Ms. Alvarez Superintendent Beverly Mitchell Assistant Principal Chrisovalantis Gailas Coach type here School Counselor Betty Robles Parent Marie Missial Parent Coordinator Jennifer Boone Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1502 Total number of ELLs 231 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.38% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 10 11 12 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Along with baseline assessments, past performance data on NYSESLAT and teacher generated assessments, our school uses data provided via the MSQI diagnostics to gauge literacy competencies and develop subsequent instructional strategies to implement in the classrom. This data provides information to be used in grouping scenarios, what literacy tools to use and the content that the the sudents will be exposed to. Also, various data and sources of information (student work) may be used during common planning time or as an inspiration for professional development topics. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Within the curriculum, there are targeted dates for assessment administration. The assessments are available prior to instruction and uniform throughout particular grade cohorts. There are teacher planning meetings programmed in teachers' schedules that allows for collaboration and data analysis. Teachers also share information and collaborate technologically via Google classroom. Teachers are provided data reports from various assessments including Benchmark MSQI assessments that are used for planning instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? According to the improvement of students’ scores on the NYSESLAT, predominantly the amount of students that succeed on their score to be declassified from ELL status. Mainly, quantiative data is used to make an evaluation on progess an the success of a program. Also, many informal discussions during common planning time meetings amongst the ENL department regarding the progress of students in terms of their ability to speak the English language and lose their dependency of a bilingual program. Here is where we also note what would be required to improve our programs throughout the year and the following year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After school tutoring is available for all students, including specific ENL cohorts taught by ENL certified teachers. Teachers use summative data to design a curriculum for tutoring. Also, during school, students have an opportunity to receive peer tutoring. Teachers use the data for planning in teacher team meetings. Ms. Toma, our ENL coach also provides resources that are available to all teachers at a designated ENL office. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Students that are classified in bilingual setting perform lower on these exams compared to their counterparts because of the dependency of their home language (Spanish) and infrequent assimilation to the English language. NYSITELL scores are usually on entering level since the students have no real background knowledge or familiarity at all with the English language. There is however an improvement compared to their spring NYSESLAT scores. Nonetheless, we see that a lot of students entering the school system do not know any English at all. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The programmer, Mr. Gailas, looks at RLAT report to group students in each grade that scored entering and emerging to be placed in a particular standalone section taught by ENL licensed teachers for two units, and then students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  entering with a Transitional Expanding level for a subsequent section to allocate an ENL licensed teacher for integrated model. Students that scored a commanding are placed in a section as to easily place an appropriately licensed teacher to Push in for half a unit a week. Curriculum is specifically tailored to each cohort based on their entering RLAT level. Students in the standalone section (entering.emerging) are provided with a curriculum to foster their language acquisition and comprehension with the NYSESLAT examination as a resource for planning. The subsequent (transitioning/expanding) cohort also uses the NYSESLAT as a resource for planning but with a more advanced curriculum. Ms. Toma, the ENL coordinator pulls out students for instruction in a smaller setting and is available for co-teaching if necessary based on collaboration amongst ENL teachers in weekly cohort meetings. b. TBE program. If applicable. Bilinguals travel together for a majority of their schedule, allowing for a team of teachers to plan collectively with the same population. Based on their scores on the state exams, students are placed in stand alone classes taught by a certified ENL teacher for literacy skills and/or the aforementioned professionals push-in students' classes, focusing on literacy c. DL program. If applicable. not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Based on the aforementioned ELL identification process and the placement of the individual based on their proficency score on the state exam, there is a comprehensive list made placing students in their respective designated category. The schedule has embedded pathways and classes allowing the students to receive their respecitve units of study as designatd on charts 5.1 and 5.2 below with the staff that is best able to meet their needs. The followign levels as of 2015-16SY, students that are entering or emerging receive at least180 minutes of standalone and integrated ENL/ELA, transitioning and expanding students receive at least 180 minutes of integrated, commanding students receive at least 80 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Providing visual and auditory resources to aid in content comprehension is a useful tool, along with the option of using glossaries to translate written text. Meetings with the literacy coach are also common, including weekly professional development opportunities. Dictionaries, record players and smart boards are resources used. Content is delivered via a curriculum that was formed by the ENL department in the school, using various grouping strategies and scaffolding and journal writing. There is also native language support for students in the bilingual program with teacher collaborating to discuss how cultural influences can affect student behavior, literature that is used during instruction and student grouping. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Professional learning communities and planning meetings to discuss past/future planning, along with analysis of formative and summative assessments. There is a targeted curriculum for ENL students based on their entry level NYSITEL/NYSESLATT scores and periodic assessments are scheduled throughout the academic year to gauge progress in acquisition and mastery of the English language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Firstly, students are placed in their appropriate course schedule to allow for the best opportunity for language development. Based on proficiency level, teams are created to allow an easier planning process for the teachers. Based on their baseline assessments, students from each subgroup are provided a course of action for language acquisition, via audio books, reading software, small group instruction, various manipulative, etc. SIFE, Newcomer and Developing students are provided with various resources and scaffolds during instruction. Curriculum is tailored to meet the needs of the aforementioned students being mindful of their language mastery entering the school year. Various modes of technology (Promethian boards, ipads, headsets) are provided to the aforementioned students as well. Long term ELLs are individually assessed with various diagnostics to determine the reasoning behind their long term ELL status 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Constant resources provided by our administrator/literacy coach, including collaboration in various workshops designed by administration to support their needs Concept maps, word walls, Socratic seminars and various instructional strategies are constantly being shared and composed by the ELA department in conjunction with our ENL teachers. Various software like REad 180 is also used.. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? One ESL teacher is assigned for SWDs to eliminate confusion and lack of communication. Firstly, SWDs IEP was looked at to assure they receive appropriate services, then an individual schedule was made by the teacher in collaboration with the administrator to assure the student is Pulled out and/or Push In the courses that will provide the least interruption to their academic growth and curricula. There is flexible programming where students are able to interact with other co-classmates outside of their core classes, especially during physical education and the arts. There are WIN periods that allow for parallel transition based on performance on skills assessments. The criteria used to place ELL's in ICT classes is based on their IEP reports on SESIS, subsequently looking at ther ENL entry level and assigning the appropriate pull in or push out. At times, our ENL pedagogues teach the aforementioned WIN classes. ENL-SWD students are pulled out by Ms. Toma during particular periods that provides instruction in a smaller setting. Ms. McGuigan, our IEP coordinator is a resource that collaborates with Ms. Toma regarding IEP goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs were divided into two ESL classes, placement being placed on the NYSESLAT score in June 2015 with emerging, entering students in one section and transitioning and expanding in another section. The students who were identified as "commanding" based on the NYSESLAT are being pulled out by an ESL teacher twice a week. Students that are ELLS and have an IEP are also being pulled out by an ESL teacher . The Bilingual program is also taught by the same group of teachers to promote common planning, integrating "What I Need" periods in math and ELA to provide further support. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? WIN periods were integrated within the grade to allow the possibility of movement from one WIN section to another if there is student growth in literacy. Double blocks were also integrated to provide better support. Also, the interview process and informing of the parents of the services will be catered more to meet parents needs to assure there is clear communication and comprehension. This program is based on our literacy scores, particularly on MSQI initiative exams and the state exam for ELA (20%). 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Nothing was discontinued because the population of ELLs entering the school as 6 th graders remained constant, particularly the students that are bilingual. No data available to provide since there was no termination of programs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students receive communication and access to all forms related to any program. There is no identification of a student's status at all upon requesting or applying for a particular school program. These programs include Sports and Arts, the Chorus club, the talent show, the debate team, school sponsored trips, prom and any activity organized by the school/administration. ELLs are invited by permission slips/invitations sent home in their respective language when indicated. ELLs fully participate by attending these aforementioned events. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Smart boards, tablets are used to support ELLs. Also, dictionaries are available as well as the opportunity to order new texts for the school to better support the ENL program There are audio recorders and film projectors available as well. Also, we are in the process of having a translation link to our school phone for ELLs to communicate in their language if they or their parents need to communicate and are having difficulty to do so in English. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? A strong effort is made to communicate with parents over the phone by trying to find individuals that speak their home language. Also, if we are aware that a particular piece of written communication needs to be translated, we accommodate that request. There is home language support via the use of various translation tools (phones, audio books, glossaries). There is also concentration on journal writing and grouping of students in their home language, but having various levels of proficiency within each group. Scaffolding using prior knowledge and familiarity with their home language is also employed. Teachers use Googletranslate to provide documents in various languages. Various language dictionaries were ordered and are provided to our ENL classrooms. Imagine learning is also a software program that is used by our ENL department. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ELL Policy Reference guide is used extensively by the programmer and the teachers in the department to support any decisions made to better meet the needs of our population and accommodate them. The cohort of pedagogues teaching the ELLs meet during common planning time meetings to discuss services and supports necessary for the various grade levels along with administration. They are urged to visit ShopDOE to purchase any materials that after planning and discussion is determined to be a useful tool in educating our students. Guidance counselors are given reports and urged to have group meetings with our ELLs, along with the presentation of various Health topics, including HIV/STIs in their language. There is also a life skills coach available when needed. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school does not share a building. However, Smart boards, tablets are used to support ELLs. Also, dictionaries are available as well as the opportunity to order new texts for the school to better support the ENL program There are audio recorders and film projectors available as well. Also, we are in the process of having a translation link to our school phone for ELLs to communicate in their language if they or their parents need to communicate and are having difficulty to do so in English. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). There is orientation at the start of the school year to allow new students the opportunity to familiarize themselves with the school before school starts. There is also plenty of outreach and planning by our Parent Coordinator (Ms. Boone) to parents to promote a harmonious academic year. New students that are enrolled also meet with guidance counselors once they are enrolled. There are also various Literacy contests designed and implemented by our Assistant Principal (Dr. Lacroix). There are also various events (multicultural night, dances, trips) that are planned including ELLs and in some cases exclusively for 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  ELLs (Ms. Rahman, Ms. Lugo, Mr. Gailas, Ms. Baffour plan various trips). We also have a Lead teacher serving as an ENL couch that supervises an ENL resource room for staff and students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Piano, Chorus, Art, Computer Design. The language electives include French and Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? There will be specific Professional Development designed for ELL personnel based on their responses to surveys or conversations, including but not limited to opportunities to attend PD outside of school, as well as constant integration with literacy and our administrator/literacy coach responsible for literacy integration. ELL personnel include the pedagogues, the guidance counselors, administrators and the cohort of teachers for ELLs, including any related Special Education staff and Support services (speech, psychologists, etc). Professional development is planned by Dr. Pembroke and Mr. Gailas (administrators). Peer instructional coaches conduct various Professional Development related to the common core learning standards, and based on communication, feedback and observations, further such workshops will be offered as needed. Teacher Mentors also support teachers with constant visitations and peer collaboration. A Lead ENL teacher, Ms. Toma, offers professional development based on teacher need and communication. Opportunities are also provided to staff based on notifications from Queens South FSC ELL team. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Besides what was already mentioned, curriculum wise there is an emphasis based on assuring students learn and are comfortable with the pre-requisite skills necessary to be successful as the progress throughout middle school, and this is focused mainly in the 6 th grade as the enter the school. A Professional development calendar will be made to assess hours and requirements, as well as the filing of Agendas and attendance sheets kept by administrators. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ENL department staff coordinate meetings with parents to come to school and meet with the child's teachers and/or assistant principal. The language preferred is identified prior to make any necessary arrangements. Letters are translated based on the Home language designation of students and provided accordingly. Various workshops are held in parents' home language 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Parent Coordinator does a fantastic job in providing outreach and various opportunities of parental involvement and fostering the relationship between the school community. Also, mailings are sent home to parets via students. When requested that a particular parent wanting to participate in such activities requires certain accommodations, every effort is made to meet them. For example, during a HS Application process workshop, there were four individuals speaking foreign languages to accommodate the preferred language needs of our parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Doctor Lacroix, our ELA/Literacy assistant principal has formulated in conjunction with the ENL department a revised curriculum to support our teachers in instruction to better serve our students. The document is extensive thus it could not be attached here, but available for reference at any time.: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Peter Leddy, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Susan B. Anthony Academy School DBN: 29Q238 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Peter Leddy Title Principal Chrisovalantis Gailas Assistant Principal Jennifer Boone Parent Coordinator Cornelia Toma ENL/Bilingual Teacher Marie Missial Parent Carlos Goonzalez Teacher/Subject Area Karrie Turner Teacher/Subject Area Dr. Pembroke Coach Coach Betty Robles School Counselor Beverly Mitchell Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 29Q238 School Name: I.S 238 Susan B. Anthony Academy Superintendent: Beverly Mitchel The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jennifer) Chris Arabelle Cornelia Boone Gailas Pembroke Toma Parent Coordinator Yes Assistant Principal Assistant Principal ENL Teacher No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. After collecting the Home Language Identification Surveys and inputting the data into ATS, we generate the RCPL and the RHLA. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Bengali Haitian Creole Urdu 481 247 33 23 20.15 10.35 1.38 .96 487 266 38 31 20.4 11.14 1.59 1.3 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Scanning in Schools Letter Cell Phone Policy Letter 9/2017 9/2017 8th Grade Activities 10/2017 School Calendars 10/2017-6/2018 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. NYCDOE Provided Translation Staff translation for Spanish and Urdu. Using theBigWord to translate for Bengali, Haitian Creole, and Arabic Translation into Spanish, Bengali, Haitian Creole, Urdu and Arabic using theBigWord. Translation into Spanish, Bengali, Haitian Creole, Urdu and Arabic using theBigWord 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conference #1 9/26/17 Parent Teacher Conference #2 11/30/17 Parent Teacher Conference #3 3/7/18 Parent Teacher Conference #4 5/9/18 interpretation service(s)? Contracted to hire 2 Bengali Interpreters and 1 Arabic interpreter from theBigWord. We have Spanish speaking, Haitian Creole, and Urdu speaking staff in the building to provide interpretation services. Will contract to hire interpreters in Bengali, Arabic, Spanish, Urdu, and/or Haitian Creole based on needs assessment conducted after the first Parent Teacher Conference on 9/26/17. Will also be purchasing personal PA systems to use for large group meetings of parents for this meeting. Will contract to hire interpreters in Bengali, Arabic, Spanish, Urdu, and/or Haitian Creole based on needs assessment conducted after the second Parent Teacher Conference on 11/30/17. Will also be purchasing personal PA systems to use for large group meetings of parents for this meeting. Will contract to hire interpreters in Bengali, Arabic, Spanish, Urdu, and/or Haitian Creole based on needs assessment conducted after the third Parent Teacher Conference on 3/7/18. Will also be purchasing personal PA systems to use for large group meetings of parents for this meeting. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Backpacked letters are translated into Spanish, Bengali, Haitian Creole, Urdu, and Arabic. This includes announcements on the school website. The school has two Dual Handset Language Line phones to assist in interpretation for parents. During the 2016-2107 school year we hired contracted with a Spanish speaking consulted to run a workshop for Spanish speaking parents. We also have bilingual staff present for monthly parent workshops on HS Application process, PTA meetings, etc... 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff were issued Over-the-Phone Interpreter Services Desk Aids, printed in color and on card stock. Additionally, staff were instructed on how to use the interpreter service during a school faculty meeting. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The NYCDOE Welcome Sign is displayed at the front desk upon entering the building. School Safety has two laminated Language Guides at the front desk. One has the 9 most popular languages and the other has 32 languages. There is a Dual handset phone to use Language Line for SSA to utilize to communicate with a visitor that requires interpretation. Staff in the main office also have the same two laminated signs and a Dual handset Language Line phone to use for interpretation. Language Access Pamphlets are available at the main office and were also distributed to identified students. All staff were issued a Over-the-Phone Interpreter Services Desk Aid, printed in color and on card stock. Announcements on the school website are translated into Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Urdu, and Haitian Creole. Our Parent Teacher Conferences will have interpreters available in Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Urdu, and Haitian Creole (utilizing staff from theBigWord and in house school staff). Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent survey including notations taken during any personal meetings had between parents and staff or administration. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73 
