 75Q256 School Name: P.S. Q256 Principal: ROBERT LOPEZ   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 75Q256 P256Q 307500014256 PreK through 12 th grade/21 years old 525 Convent Road, Syosset, NY 11791 516-921-0450 Phone Number: 516-921-4045 Fax: Robert Lopez RLopez13@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Robert Lopez Hans Marryshow Mr. Albert Hiller Lottrell Granger Not Applicable ShatasiaZeno Justin Lanzo NA District Information Ketler Louissaint Superintendent: 400 1 st Avenue, NY, NY 10010 KLouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1500 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   District 75 Field Support Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jude Arthur Executive Director: 400 1st Avenue, NY, NY 10010 Jarthur2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1604 Phone Number: 212-706-4531 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Robert Lopez Hans Marryshow Mr. AlbertHiller NA NA ShatasiaZeno AmirHanif NA Lottrell Granger Erin Ferguson Marguerite Moran *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Teacher Member/Paraprofessional   Name Diana Judge Elizabeth Kaufman Clare King Cary Greenidge-Palmer Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Teacher Member/Guidance Counselor Member/ Teacher Parent Member/ Member/ Parent Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At P256Q, we believe our safe and nurturing environment supports our diverse student population to achieve their educational and social potential. Our collaborative learning community provides students with curricula and resources that are rich in language, literacy, creative thinking and expression. By utilizing on-going assessments, we individualize instruction and celebrate student achievement. Through varied partnerships, we provide practical life experiences that support independence, happiness and well-being.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. It is our vision that through meaningful educational and social-emotional experiences, P256Q fosters a culture that inspires our students with a sense of hope and confidence in their abilities to be life long learners equipped with the skills to succeed in an ever changing world. Our Instructional Focus for the 2018-19 school year will continue to ensure students practice skills of self-assessment to promote ownership of learning and independence (2.2). As per our Quality Review Report 2017-2018 Feedback SY 2017-2018, our Area of Celebration is Leveraging Resources in that 'practices connected to resources and staff professional time lead to meaningful work products for all students.' Conversely, our identified area of focus relates to 1.1 Curriculum. Moving forward, we will continue to work together to increase the level of rigor for all students by using the instructional shifts to address the staircase of complexity and academic vocabulary. P256Q programs are located in diverse settings including two agency sites, a stand alone D75 building and four programs co-located in general education buildings. Our work with the agency sites has allowed us to collaborate on both academic and clinical supports provided by the agency for the students in their care, ensuring the best outcome for them. In addition, our co-located high school program has worked diligently to develop positive relationships with neighborhood businesses through our Work Study program, including JASA, McDonald's, Belle Harbor Manor and CVS. Being part of District 75 affords us the opportunity to work with a variety of student populations in both standardized and alternate assessments, across six physical locations. We have both residential and non-residential facility, as well as inclusion programs and self-contained classrooms. We service students with Individualized Education Plans in 6:1:1, 8:1:1, 8:1:2 (preschool), 12:1:1, 12:1:4, 8:1 (inclusion) and 9:3 (inclusion) for 12 months of programming. In addition, at the high school level, we house the START program through the Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR), the Close to Home program through Administration for Children Services (ACS) and the Raise the Age initiative (RTA) through the Office of Children and Family Services for students placed and monitored by the court system. All students receive free lunch as per District 75 programming. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our students' Individualized Education Plan (IEPs) note classifications that include but are not limited to autism, emotional and/or intellectual disabilities and other health impairment. Our students’ needs include academic, behavior management, communication, social/interpersonal development, and/or physical development needs that interfere with the instructional process, to the extent that additional adult support is needed to engage in learning and who require specialized/specially designed instruction in and out of the classroom, and in the community at large. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our key area of focus for last school year 2017-2018 aligned with our school's newly development mission statement, related to Rigorous Instruction, specifically self-assessment (2.2). During the SY 2017-2018, P256Q made the most progress in the element of assessment (2.2), as identified in in improvement in ratings from fall to spring in our Principal Performance Observation Report as well as a 'Well Developed' rating the the Quality Review Report, 2017-18. In addition, our goal focused on demonstrating improvement in self-assessment scores in English Language Arts based activities using teacher create rubrics. We identified a twenty six (26%) increase in the accuracy of students self-assessment scores as compared to his/her teacher's rating and surpassed our goal of a two (2%) increase. In the 0  SY 2018-2019, P256Q will continue to focus on Rigorous Instruction as it relates to the staircase of complexity and academic vocabulary. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75Q256 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) 510 SIG Recipient (Y/N) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Drama # Music # Dance # CTE N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 79.2% % Reduced Lunch 13.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 31.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 11.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 81.0% 0.2% 86.9% 50.4% 5.9% 0.8% 8 41% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the school year 2017-2018, teachers focused on improving student's ability to self-assess their own work in order to provide students with the opportunity to monitor their understanding of content, identify their strengths and weaknesses, and revise accordingly. Teachers focused on English Language Arts based activities as evidenced by successful completion of comparing low inference data (teacher's rubric score with student's rubric score) to drive instruction. For ELA self-assessment administered to standardized students in grades K-5, there was a twenty-six percent increase of students that scored within 3 points of the teacher. In grades 6-8, student's data remained the same between the baseline and benchmark. According to our SY 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, P256Q has a sixty six (66%) percent positive response in 'Academic Press' within the Rigorous Instruction component which is thirteen (13%) percent lower than the city average. Only fifty four (54%) of our students report feeling challenged in their classes. Our SY 2017-2018 Principal Performance Observation indicates an improvement in 'engaging and supporting teachers to provide more rigorous learning experiences for our students' (1.2) by creating ' a system that truly monitors student learning and that captures their incremental gains so that teachers can quickly decide on next learning steps.' (2.2) In utilizing teacher created rubrics and developing conferencing strategies for the 2018-2019 school year, our students and educational teams need to continue to gain experience in utilizing self-assessment to monitor their understanding of content. Our grades 6-8 data indicates that our educational teams need to further develop conferencing skills and strategies with students, in order to for students to further identify their strengths and weaknesses. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P256Q teacher cohorts for students in grades 6-8 standardized assessment will demonstrate improved self-assessment scores of 5% over baseline in English Language Arts and Math based activities as measured by a teacher created self-assessment rubric, appropriate to grade level content. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). -Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) will examine current curricula (Prentice Hall, GoMath), lesson planning and performance tasks to create rubrics for self assessment of unit targets/objectives for both ELA and Math. Teachers, students Support will be provided to teachers through PD, inter-class visitations, in classroom support, professional dialogue/conversations, sharing of student work during PLC and professional development workshops. Teachers, students PLC weekly meetings, September through June 2019 PLC weekly meetings, September through June 2019 Teachers, Instructional Support Coordinator, Unit Coordinators, Administration Teachers, Instructional Support Coordinator, Unit Coordinators, Administration Strategies: -Direct instruction of skill with completion of self assessment rubrics at the end of each unit -Student Conferencing -Student Checklist -Student groupings Teachers, Paraprofessionals, students 4-6 weeks at the end of each unit, October through June 2019 Teachers, Instructional Support Coordinator -Development of reading portfolios to provide evidence of growth Teachers, paraprofessionals -Review of data based on completion of student self assessment rubrics at PLC Teachers, paraprofessionals 4-6 weeks at the end of each unit, October through June 2019 Teachers, Instructional Support Coordinator, Unit Coordinators, Administration 4-6 weeks at the end of each unit, October through June 2019 Teachers, Instructional Support Coordinator, Unit Coordinators, Administration 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. -Parent Engagement: Send home the rubric at the start of each unit for the parents awareness of curricula targets, with an update at the end of the unit regarding how the student/child did. Include a informative sheet with home/school connections notes as they relate to the targeted skills (to be completed by grade cohort teachers, as dictated by the units, every 4-6 weeks) -Invite families for end of the year 'ELA Share out Celebration' or 'Math Share out Celebration' (Grade Cohort teachers and administration, May or June) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: -Per Diem monies - to acquire substitutes for any necessary PD (SubCentral) -Per session monies – teachers/supervisors (curriculum development). Instructional Programs: -NYSTL Monies for Textbooks/Library funds -General supplies (code 100 monies) -Teacher's Choice Scheduling adjustments: - Scheduling to ensure PLC meetings weekly. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. -Teacher made self assessment rubric for each unit -Benchmarks: a. November - baseline 5  b. By February 2019, P256Q teacher cohorts for students in grades 6-8 standardized assessment will demonstrate improved self-assessment scores of 2% over baseline in English Language Arts and Math based activities as measured by a teacher created self-assessment rubric, appropriate to grade level content. c. By June 2019, P256Q teacher cohorts for students in grades 6-8 standardized assessment will demonstrate improved self-assessment scores of 5% over baseline in English Language Arts and Math based activities as measured by a teacher created self-assessment rubric, appropriate to grade level content. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Self assessment rubrics, pre and post for each ELA and math unit Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our Principal Performance Review MOLP Summative Feedback SY 2017-18 celebrates our work in 'supporting teachers with the development of effective pedagogical practices and strategies to engage in inquiry to strengthen professional practices. This work is resulting in positive student growth and aligned to the school's vision of inspiring students with a sense of hope and confidence in their abilities (5.1/3.1).' Our area of focus to further develop support environments within our organization as it relates to student/teacher trust at 85%, compared to the city average of 90% (-5%). During the 2017-2018 school year, forty-four (44%) of our school staff participated in professional development related to the topic of Positive Behavior Supports, including Therapeutic Crisis Intervention, Restorative Justice Circles and/or LSCI. Moving forward to school year 2018-19, there is a need to continue to further expand training to support staff and students in use of the effective strategies within these PBIS initiatives. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P256Q ten percent (10%) of staff member will participate and be trained in various Positive Behavior Intervention Supports as measured by attendance sign in sheets and evaluated through qualitative feedback by administration. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). -Identify needs of staff and populations of students that would benefit from PBIS training and support. All staff August and September 2018 Administration -Identify opportunity for participation through District and outside resources that are available to support this initiative -Meet with staff to discuss expectation and identify areas of focus in relation to PBIS -Creation and administration of a needs assessment to determine school interest, needs, strengths, etc. to increase staff buy in. -Follow up with staff regarding satisfaction of participation in PD. All staff October 2018 Assigned PDA teachers -Maintain measures and/or supports (reminders to coordinators, collection/tabulation of reports, etc) -Arrange for staff to attend scheduled PD (i.e. coverages, etc.) Teachers, paraprofessionals and related service providers Monthly, and as offered/scheduled Unit Coordinators, Administration -Gather attendance sheets, and tracking list of staff trained with dates Attendees to all related PD Monthly, and as offered/scheduled -Have attendee complete a feedback/evaluation to obtain qualitative feedback regarding outcome of PD. Attendees, presenters and administration 8  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. -Parent engagement: a. Letters will be sent home to parents to inform /educate them about what PD opportunities staff are involved in to support development of his/her practice as they relate to full day and district trainings (administration twice per year). b. Distribution of a PBIS student handbook to support implementation of PBIS strategies for families, students and staff members, as well as posting of information to the school website. c. Offer a parent in service on PBIS (Behavior Support Coordinator, Spring 2019) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Scheduling: Utilize Professional Development Assignments -Technology: PowerPoint, projectors -Per session monies – teachers/supervisors; OTPS general supplies (code 100) for necessary materials/staff development funds (600 monies) if applicable. -Per Diem monies - for teacher and paraprofessional coverage for attendance at workshops; paid preps; etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. -Attendance at scheduled PD with successful completion of training (i.e. certificates); and Evaluation Forms: -Benchmark: a. By February 2019, P256Q ten percent (3%) of staff member will participate and be trained in various Positive Behavior Intervention Supports as measured by attendance sign in sheets and evaluated through qualitative feedback by administration. 9  b. By April 2019, P256Q ten percent (6%) of staff member will participate and be trained in various Positive Behavior Intervention Supports as measured by attendance sign in sheets and evaluated through qualitative feedback by administration. c. By June 2019, P256Q ten percent (10%) of staff member will participate and be trained in various Positive Behavior Intervention Supports as measured by attendance sign in sheets and evaluated through qualitative feedback by administration. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Review of attendance sign in sheets, evaluative forms Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our focus on further developing the element of Collaborative Teachers continues to be evident in the creation of our instructional cabinet, our buddy teacher system and in the professional development opportunities provided to support our priority needs using clear rubrics for quality. Through the continued work of our School Implementation Team (SIT), our intended outcome is ultimately for our instructional practices to comprehensively mirror what is written within the Individualized Education Plan (IEP) for each student. IEPs are reviewed and scored for quality using two rubrics - IEP Present Levels of Performance (PLoP) and IEP Goals using a 0 (under-developed) through 4 (well developed) rubric rating. For the 2017-18 school year, our identified areas of need focused on the evaluation and academic/social/physical sections of the PLoP. Although improvement was evident in the improvement of average rubric rating scores, there is a need to continue working to further developing each student's IEP, as we did not meet our goal of a full point of improvement. In addition, feedback from our most recently published School Quality Guide (SY 2016- 2017) identified the areas of 'Innovation and Collective Responsibility' (71%) within the Framework Element, Collaborative Teachers as below the city average of 74%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P256Q will demonstrate an increase of 5% in the average score of the Academic/Social/Physical sections of the Present Levels of Performance (PLoP) sections of Individual Education Plans using low inference data collection (PLoP rubric). 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). -Meet as an instructional cabinet (SIT) to determine a common understanding of what quality IEPs look like -Continue development and revision of two handbooks to streamline systems - one for unit coordinators and one for teachers in developing the IEP process from start to finish. -Create a new scoring rubric using the content from these handbooks to accurately measure quality of IEP. -Create all necessary forms and appendix items to be utilized in the development and completion of the IEP process. -Provide professional development to the instructional cabinet, as well as teachers in the development of quality IEPs, PLoP rubric, etc. School Implementation Team (SIT) members, classroom teachers and related service providers School Implementation Team members, classroom teachers, related service providers -Utilize a teacher buddy system to determine quality of IEPs using the district PLoP rubric (i.e. schedules, etc.) Classroom teachers -Collaboration between buddy teachers to access quality of targeted sections of PLoP using rubric to identify IEP rubric score. -Submission of scored rubrics three times a year to examine progress toward improvement using the PLoP rubric for the targeted components -Review of scores by SIT team to guide PD provided to teachers writing IEPs. SIT, classroom teachers Summer and fall of 2018, monthly Administration and School Implementation Team members Fall 2018, PD ongoing; Administration and School Implementation Team members Three times a year, November/February and May, or in alignment with annual reviews School Implementation Team members Three times a year, November/February and May, or in alignment with annual reviews School Implementation Team members 2  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Engagement: -Parent/Teacher Conferences to review IEP content and progress -Teachers will invite individual and/or group of families to 'parent trainings' for topics specific to students' IEPs. -Ensure review of IEP content during IEP meetings, including parent/student voice content areas of the PLoP. (teachers, district representative) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: -Per session monies – teachers/supervisors/unit coordinators -Per Diem monies - obtain substituate for PD coverage -OTPS: staff development funds (600 monies) if applicable. Instructional programming: -OTPS supplies - general (100 monies) for printing of handbooks, purchasing of instructional materials -NYSTL monies - textbook, software as appropriate to student student growth -Teacher's choice monies Scheduling adjustments: -Scheduling for instructional cabinet meetings/buddy teacher assignments, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 3  -Baseline PLoP rubric scores to be gathered from each teachers' last finalized IEP (from 2017- 2018 school year), completed in October 2018 -Benchmarks: a. By November 1 for baseline, b. By February 2019, P256Q will demonstrate an increase of 3% in the average score of the Academic/Social/Physical sections of the Present Levels of Performance (PLoP) sections of Individual Education Plans using low inference data collection (PLoP rubric). c. By June 2019, P256Q will demonstrate an increase of 5% in the average score of the Academic/Social/Physical sections of the Present Levels of Performance (PLoP) sections of Individual Education Plans using low inference data collection (PLoP rubric). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Handbook Rubric - A/S/P Rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Providing teachers with the opportunity to reflect on his or her practice builds ownership and aims at creating a culture of continuous improvement. In our End of the Year conference and IPC meetings, supervisors and teachers collaborated to examine feedback provided through the Advance program to determine next steps and areas of improvement. Through these conversations, our school’s vision is reinforced in our focus to provide rigorous instruction for all students. The need for rigor in our instruction continues to allow us to set high standards, reinforcing the school’s vision. This goal will aim at improving student achievement in areas that specifically target students’ needs with designated program self-contained ratios. For example, identified goals for standardized assessment classes may include improvement in student behavior and/or targeted academic growth while an alternate assessment teacher may focus on improvement in communication and improvement in a student’s ability to self-regulate him/herself. In the Effective School Leadership component of our SY 2017-2018 School Quality Guide/D75, three of the four sub-sections of the 'teacher influence' measure are below the district average, ranging from two (2%) to seven (7%) percent. It is our goal to ensure we meet the needs of our staff members in these areas. Also, although we have established common beliefs that align with the Danielson Framework for Teaching, feedback from our Principal Performance Observance SY 2017-2018 states the need to focus on 1e. Designing Coherent Instruction 'to increase the level of rigor and purposeful student engagement.' Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, K-12 teachers with the support of site administrators will improve targeted student academic or behavioral outcomes by three percent (3%) over baseline as identified in a professional growth plan using low inference data (i.e. data collection, charts, frequency charts, rubrics, etc.), measured by the special education teacher. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). -Initial Planning Conference (IPC) and End of the Year Conference meetings, with ongoing feedback through formal and informal observations. All teachers rated with the Advance System September/October 2018; June 2019 Teachers and site administrator -Provide Professional Growth Plan templates to guide self-assessment and identification of goals -Collaborative discussions between supervisor and teacher to evaluate and edit identified goals accordingly -Develop administrative system/structure for accountability, including observation calendar and a site based spreadsheet tracking benchmark outcomes. -Professional development in the component(s) of the Advance Teacher Effectiveness program -Ongoing opportunities for PD in each teacher’s professional growth plan. Ongoing, as identified Teachers and site administrator All teachers rated with the Advance System Winter and spring 2019) Teachers and site administrator -The Advance Rating system will be regularly utilized to provide teachers with immediate and specific feedback to improve his/her instructional practice -Utilization of effective instructional and behavioral strategies, including PBIS strategies, groupings, direct instructional, specifically designed instruction (differentiation) All teachers rated with the Advance System -Creation of teacher made data collection sheets to track student progress on targeted skills -Creation of a teacher self reflection sheet to describe evidence/findings -Review of low inference data for each goal, at targeted benchmarks with completion of a teacher self reflection at each benchmark 6  -Review evidence of progress toward each teacher's identified goal at the Summative End of the Year Conferences, June 2019. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement June 2019 Administration All teachers rated with the Advance System How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Engagement: -Incorporate the parent coordinator for the home/school connection. Ensure parent participation in the IEP process to develop a comprehensive IEP, via in person meeting or phone conferences to address parent needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Per Diem monies for substitute coverage - e.g. www.district75pd.org and school based PD (common planning, Election Day/BQ day, etc.) Instructional Programming: OTPS: -General supplies monies (code 100 monies); NYSTL monies - textbook, software; Equipment monies (code 300) - for technology including RESO A funds. -Charlotte Danielson Framework for Effective Teaching Scheduling adjustments: -Professional Learning Communities, collaborative inquiry teams, PD agendas to provide opportunities for growth in designated topics related to professional growth plans. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7  -Review the development of Professional Growth Plans (fall 2018) -Benchmark will document each teachers' progress toward his/her goal, using teacher made data collection sheets, including checklists, charts, rubrics and/or assessments: a. Baseline will be gathered by November 2018 for all targeted objectives. b. By February 2019, K-12 teachers with the support of site administrators will improve targeted student academic or behavioral outcomes by three percent (1%) over baseline as identified in a professional growth plan using low inference data (i.e. data collection, charts, frequency charts, rubrics, etc.), measured by the special education teacher. c. By March 2019, K-12 teachers with the support of site administrators will improve targeted student academic or behavioral outcomes by three percent (2%) over baseline as identified in a professional growth plan using low inference data (i.e. data collection, charts, frequency charts, rubrics, etc.), measured by the special education teacher. d. By June 2019, K-12 teachers with the support of site administrators will improve targeted student academic or behavioral outcomes by three percent (3%) over baseline as identified in a professional growth plan using low inference data (i.e. data collection, charts, frequency charts, rubrics, etc.), measured by the special education teacher. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Low Inference data collection (rubrics, pre/post assessment, data collection forms, surveys, ' tracking sheets', etc.), as determined by each teacher, specific to his/her goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P256Q's mantra is 'Kids First, High Expectations, No Excuses,' which is evidenced in our rating of Well Developed in the SY 2017-2018 Quality Review Report - P256Q has 'established a culture for learning that systematically communicates a belief and vision of high expectations related to college and career preparedness for all students (School Culture - 3.4 High Expectations).' Our speech department offers ongoing parent trainings across all sites, on topics ranging AAC and visual supports in the home to feeding strategies to using play to develop social skills. However, attendance is low at 2-3 parents at each workshop. In addition, eighty-four (84%) of our families say that they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school event, which is five (5%) percent below the District and City average, according to the SY 2017-2018 School Quality Guide making this our priority need. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, ten percent (10%) of the Parents/Families of students in the Food Bank of NYC's Cookshop program will participate and provide qualitative responses on the impact of healthy eating as measure by attendance sign in sheets and evaluation feedback forms managed by the Parent Coordinator. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  -Application for acceptance into the Cookshop Program, and attendance at all required trainings. -Identification of students participation across sites, via class and scheduling assignment (43 and 831) -Development of a Cookshop Distribution and contact lists (e.g. email, phone and mailing addresses) Parent Coordinator, Cookshop Coordinator and Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Cookshop classes (10) and parent/families Cookshop classes (10) and parent/families June 2018, August 31, 2018 and October 2018. As per Food Bank of NYC Cookshop Schedule, TBA Parent Coordinator As per Food Bank of NYC Cookshop Schedule, TBA -Incorporate of Cookshop Information for Parent on the Parent Section of the website -Identification of Parent Training days as per Cookshop schedule and requirement Cookshop Families -Determine appropriate location for all parent events -Distribute invitations to parent/families, at minimum twice to ensure appropriate notification using contact and distribution lists -Ordering of food/materials for parent training -Preparations and facilitation of attendance sheets and evaluation forms for completion on the day of the event -Administer the event as detailed in the lesson plan from the Cookshop program, using detailed guidelines provided -Parent Coordinator will utilize Cookshop resources as well as other resources from the District's Office for Parent Engagement. 0  -Incorporation of concepts related to healthy eating within lesson planning, and IEP development as appropriate (e.g. feeding issues, etc.) in targeted Cookshop classes. -Utilize speech therapist to support students' feeding goals if applicable, and strategies for the home school conection as appropriate. -Track parent attendance at each event -Create summary of progress toward goal at identified benchmarks -Prepare and present findings to administration, and staff during school wide PD 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parent Coordinator Cookshop classes (10) and parent/families; parent coordinator As per Food Bank of NYC Cookshop Schedule, TBA; At all Benchmarks and June 2019 If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parent engagement: -Offer parents information regarding healthy eating in person and via the school website using resources from Food Bank of NYC. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Per session monies for substitute coverage for staff attendance at training, as appropriate. Instructional Programmings: Materials and supplies are supplied by Food Bank of NY; items needed supplementing will come from the following if appropriate: Non-contractual (food): object code 0400 Supplies – General: object code 0100 (for creation of flyers, etc.; and/or ONLY necessary if not supplied by Cookshop) Equipment monies (300) to ensure access to technology programming. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 1  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. -Attendance at scheduled Parent Training with successful participation as described in qualitative feedback (e.g. evaluation forms). -Benchmark: a. By February 2019, three percent (3%) of the Parents/Families of students in the Food Bank of NYC's Cookshop program will participate and provide qualitative responses on the impact of healthy eating as measure by attendance sign in sheets and evaluation feedback forms managed by the Parent Coordinator. b. By April 2019, six percent (6%) of the Parents/Families of students in the Food Bank of NYC's Cookshop program will participate and provide qualitative responses on the impact of healthy eating as measure by attendance sign in sheets and evaluation feedback forms managed by the Parent Coordinator. c. By June 2019, ten percent (10%) of the Parents/Families of students in the Food Bank of NYC's Cookshop program will participate and provide qualitative responses on the impact of healthy eating as measure by attendance sign in sheets and evaluation feedback forms managed by the Parent Coordinator. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sign in sheets and evaluation forms. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students scoring below grade level ELA competencies on baseline, benchmark and interim assessments in grades k-12 Students scoring level 2 or below on NYS ELA exam in grades 3-8 Students scoring below grade level Mathematic competencies on baseline, benchmark and interim assessments in grades k-12 Students scoring level 2 or below on NYS Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group and one to one tutoring Services provided during school day Small group and one to one tutoring Services provided during school day Strategies include differentiating instruction and focusing on individual learning styles to help build reading and writing ability skill by skill, individualized instruction & practice, test–taking strategies Leveled, as well as multisensory strategies to systematically development of phonics, language comprehension and reading skills. The use of many examples and practice to help students understand and retain Math concepts. Multisensory strategies to deliver mathematical concepts. 3  ELA exam in grades 3-8 Science Students scoring below grade level on subject area baseline, benchmark and interim assessments in grades k-12 Social Studies Students scoring below grade level on subject area baseline, benchmark and interim assessments in grades k-12 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students demonstrating need for greater support as evidenced in staff Differentiating instruction and focusing on individual learning styles to help build math ability skill by skill, with individualized instruction & practice, test–taking strategies Strategy includes reading strategies for scientific concepts and ideas. Practice of interpreting readings in Science and applying that understanding and developing activities. Use of multisensory strategies and practices to deliver and demonstrate concepts. Strategy includes reading strategies in the content areas of Social Studies that enable student to strengthen their core knowledge of S. S. and assist in building greater ability to understand and retain information. Use of multisensory strategies and practices to deliver and demonstrate concepts. Counseling and support staff meetings with students that incorporate various social and behavioral Small group and one to one tutoring Services provided during school day Small group and one to one tutoring Services provided during school day Small group and one to one tutoring Services provided during school day 4  anecdotals and CIT intervention. support Therapeutic Crisis Intervention (TCI), Life Space Crisis Intervention (LSCI), PBIS Emotional Literacy 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. NA 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). NA Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 8  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. NA 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 9  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. Q256, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. Q 256 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 1  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. Q256, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 3  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 4  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 5  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 6  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P256Q is a special education school within the New York City Department of Education's District 75 program. P256Q consists of seven sites, located throughout the Rockaways in Queens with the main site located in Syosset, Long Island. Several inclusion programs operate within three of the seven sites. The school has a total population of 536 students, 84 (15.67% ) of whom are English Language Learners (ELLs). P256Q has a diverse population of students ranging in grades Pre-K through grade 12, which include students with disabilities such as: emotional disturbance, intellectual disability, autism, multiple disabilities, learning disability, and speech impairment, as described on each student's Individualized Education Program. The classroom ratios at P256Q vary throughout the six sites that include: 12:1:1, 8:1:1, 6:1:1, and 12:1:4. All students participate in either New York State Standardized or Alternate Assessments. As per NYSESLAT 2018, the majority of our students are at the Entering level of English proficiency. The following languages are spoken in the homes of the students at P256Q:Bengali, Cantonese, Chinese, English, Haitian Creole, Mandarin, Polish, Portuguese, Punjabi, Spanish, Tamil and Urdu. Description of Supplemental Title III Language Instruction Program:The Title III supplemental language instructional program for English Language Learners will take place in the residential treatment program at the Mercy First site in Syosset. The program will run on Saturdays, for 12 sessions from January through April 2019 ( 9:30 to 1:30 PM). Instruction will be delivered in English by one New York State certified ENL teacher, using ENL methodologies. Support will be provided by one Spanish speaking Special Education teacher. The theme “Exploring Cultures in the ENL Classroom: Building English Language Skills Through the Arts” focuses on supporting students who are reading below grade level while fostering the acquisition of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English. Each session will focus on a different target country, allowing students to explore cultures, customs, food, music, etc. The cooking component of the program will support the new information learned, while fostering language acquisition, independence and the development of functional daily living skills. The program will serve 24 students with a 12:1:1 ratio, in grades 9 and 10. The agency ratio is 5:1 students to staff, respectively. The agency staff will attend all sessions with students, but they do not require remuneration from the DOE. Materials:The material to be purchased this year are: plates, cups, napkins, utensils, aprons, disposable gloves, germicidal wipes, a classroom set of white boards, aluminum foil, and cardstock paper. A binder will also be purchased to store program lesson plans and other important documents. Additionally, assorted food products will be purchased to support the cooking portion of each session. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration 9  Part C: Professional Development topics to be covered   name of provider Begin description here: In the article titled, 'The Education of Immigrant Children,' by Mary Tamer, the author discusses the shift of the U.S. demography and how schools can adapt to better serve the changing population. According to the article, "immigrant youth are best supported when schools foster bi cultural identities, enabling them to navigate multiple cultural worlds effectively. All children in the 21st century need to learn to cross cultural boundaries, whether ethnic, racial, age, geographic, or other boundaries." In order to support our students, the ENL teacher and Special Education teacher will provide professional developments for one hour before 6 out of the 12 sessions on Saturdays (from 8:30 AM to 9:30AM). The topics to be covered are as follow: 1. Gaining an understanding of the plight of immigrant undocumented minors (1 session) 2. Recognize the impact that being uprooted from their native land has on their daily lives in the US (1 session) 3. Exploring cultural, academic and psychological techniques and interventions appropriate for this group of students (2 sessions) 4. Creating and maintaining a culturally responsive classroom environment (2 sessions) These topics are addressed in the book titled 'The Inner World of the Immigrant Child,' by Cristina Igoa; copies of the necessary sections will be available for each participant. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The supplemental language instructional program is taking place at Mercy First, a residential treatment program in Syosset. The students are admitted to Mercy First for a variety of reasons that include placement in the foster care program, Abuse/Prevention program, or the Non-Secure Detention Services program. The students in our program have very limited or no contact with their parents/guardians; therefore, while at Mercy First they are assigned a case manager or “surrogate parent.” Throughout the program, the case managers will participate in the cultural activities alongside their clients. Participation in the cultural activities will strengthen the case manager/client relationship.The case managers will be invited to attend all 12 sessions of the program as well as the professional development sessions. 0  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $10,350.20  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff 0 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. $2,015.80 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1 secretary x 10 hrs. x 37.37= $373.70 Instructional Program: 1 supervisor x 12 days x 4 hrs. x 63.45 = $3,045.60 2 teachers x 12 days x 4 hrs. x 60.65 = $5,822.40 Professional Development: 2 teachers x 6 hrs. x 60.65= $727.80 0 Dixie Paper Plates (500/ct.) 1 x $35.32 = $35.32 Dixie Plastic Cold Cups (500 ct.) 1 x $40.62 = $40.62 Staples Plastic Forks (300/bx.) 1 x 8.50 = $8.50 Staples Plastic Spoons (300/bx.) 1 x 8.50 = $8.50 Staples Plastic Knives (300/bx.) 1 x 8.50 = $8.50 Staples Luncheon Napkins (2,400 ct.) 1 x 22.18 = $22.18 Vinyl Exam Gloves (case of 1,000) 1 x 29.50 = $29.50 Rubberized Aprons 20 x 4.10 = $82.00 2XL Antibacterial Wipes Bucket 1 x 77.91 = $77.91 School Smart 2 Inch Binder, White 1 x 5.15 = $5.15 School Specialty Aluminum Foil 1 x 31.79 = $31.79 White Cardstock- Pack of 250 1 x 10.96 = $10.96 Color Cardstock- Pack of 250 1 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1 x 18.76 = $18.76 Flipside Dry-Erase Classroom Set 0 0 0 $12,366.00 Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 0 0 $12,366.00 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name P256Q Borough Queens School Number 256 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Robert Lopez Assistant Principal Sharon McGreevy Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lisamarie Tagallie/ Gurneet K Coach School Counselor Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Parent Al Hiller Parent Coordinator Donna Tuffuor Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Mary Keane - Testing Coordinat C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 540 3 Total number of ELLs 90 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 16.67%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 00 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess our K – 8 ELLs that take standardized assessments, our school uses Fountas and Pinnell, Individual Running Records, classroom data collection, and Scantron Performance Series. To assess our 9 – 12 ELLs that take standardized assessments, our school uses Individual Running Records, classroom data collection, and Scantron Performance Series.To assess our K -12 ELLs that take NYSAA, our school uses SANDI/FAST (Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory/Formative Assessment of Standards Task) and classroom data collection. The data collected from these assessments help us to identify students that are “At Risk” and we adjust our school’s instructional plan accordingly through team meetings and common planning meetings. The information from the assessments aid us in providing immediate support in the students’ low performing areas. With this data, we can review the ELL’s individual progress during common planning periods and intervention strategies can be implemented. Forty two of our 90 ELL students participate in Standardized Assessment. Forty eight of our 90 ELL students participate in the New York State Alternate Assessment (NYSAA). 4  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The K-8 standardized students are using Ready Gen., which is an integrated and well balanced approach to reading and writing instruction. Authentic texts with modeling and teacher directed activities drive learning and motivate readers. Instruction focuses on reading, writing, speaking, and listening in response to authentic text. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? NYSITELL, NYSAA, and Running Records are used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After analyzing results to identify areas of weakness, students receive individualized goals and small group instruction. Small group instruction focuses on the four modalities of the English language; listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Additionally, teachers meet during common planning periods in order to discuss the individual needs of the students. Teachers collaborate to create meaningful instruction to address those needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses RTI as a systematic process for examining how ELLs' backgrounds and educational contexts (i.e., first and second language proficiency, educational history including bilingual models, immigration pattern, socioeconomic status, and culture) have an impact on their academic achievement in a U.S. classroom. As a first step in the screening process, when a student enters a NYC public school for the first time, a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) is completed. With this information, our teachers begin to uncover the factors that could influence the student's English language learning process, thereby allowing this knowledge to guide linguistically responsive instructional choices. In addition to screening and identification for ENL services to support language development, the ELL student also takes part in RTI screening to assess whether his or her literacy skills and competencies are meeting grade level benchmarks. All of our students also come into our community with a psychoeducational evaluation that reports academic intelligence and emotional skills. This report is conducted by a school psychologist or a private agency hired by the parents. If an ELL student is flagged as at-risk or below-benchmark on any particular skill or competency, the student receives targeted instructional support to support development in this area. This support is delivered in coordination with language support services. Teachers and parents are given an opportunity to examine the appropriateness of classroom instruction and the classroom context, based on knowledge of individual student factors. Classroom instruction and specific attention toward CCLS IEP goals is the key step to supporting ELLs at-risk for or experiencing difficulties, as well as a critical step in fully implementing the RTI model. We implement Tier I of the ELL RTI (Strong Core Instruction) by developing language and literacy across the curriculum, making lessons meaningful, teaching complex thinking, and teaching through conversation. Tier II (Targeted Intervention) begins by identifying of instructional areas (specific skills and competencies) that need further, more intense intervention.Tier III (Progress monitoring DATA) informs us of how at-risk students are responding to instruction. Progress monitoring data is used to make educational decisions about changes in IEP goals, 1:1 instruction, and/or related services such as speech and language services. When progress is monitored, the expected rate of an ELL's progress takes into account language development and background. The student’s progress is then compared with levels demonstrated by appropriate peer groups. Teachers and Related Service Providers create a plan for gathering information through informal and formal assessments such as teacher made tests, NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, informal assessments, and high stakes state exams in which some students receive testing accommodations. Common Planning time provides a non discriminatory interpretation of all assessment data. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. P256Q evaluates the success of our program for ELLs by examining the data from the NYSESLAT scores, comparing it to the previous years’ scores, and tracking the progress of each ELL's individual goals on their IEP. Additionally, P256Q identifies 5  ELLs who are taking regents. Using the data from the regents, the ENL teacher works with the content area teacher to identify areas of need, modifying the delivery of content in order to support the ELL's continued progress. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our school uses Common Planning and Parent-teacher conferences to distribute these findings to ensure any adjustments to be made. Feedback from both teachers and the Professional Learning Community aid in determining any necessary changes to be made in order to improve our ELL programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Forty seven percent of our students participate in Standardized Assessment and fifty three percent of our students participate in New York State Alternate Assessment. Instruction is delivered using the Freestanding ENL model. Our school does not offer any bilingual classes at this time; therefore, the students mandated for bilingual classes (the result of parent and CSE initial IEP meeting) receive ENL services and are placed in a classroom with an Alternate Placement Paraprofessional that is fluent in both English and the student’s native language. The teacher utilizes the Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL models of instruction when providing services. The groups are made up heterogeneously, in terms of their ENL requirements, but are homogeneous in terms of the students’ cognitive needs and depending on the students' mandate and classification as per the IEP. Student groups observe the three contiguous grade rule. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In our model, the ENL teacher is required to provide a detailed schedule to the Principal and Assistant Principals in order to ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes are being provided in agreement with grade and proficiency levels. This is in accordance with explicit CR Part 154-2 regulations. The students receive the maximum number of allowable ENL minutes given the staffing and geographical constraints of our organization. The classroom teacher works in conjunction with the ENL teacher to ensure that the mandated number of Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL instructional minutes are being met. The classroom teachers are also given a copy of the ENL teacher’s schedule. Entering level ELLs in Grades K-8 are mandated to receive 360 minutes per week. Of these 360 minutes, 1 unit of study is Stand-Alone ENL (180 minutes), while the other unit is Integrated ENL/ELA (180 minutes). Emerging level ELLs in grades K-12 are mandated to receive 360 minutes a week. One unit must be Integrated ENL/ELA (180 minutes), one half of a unit of instruction must be Stand-Alone ENL(90 minutes), and the other half a unit can be Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL/Content Area (90 minutes). Transitioning level ELLs in Grades K-12 receive 180 minutes per week. One half a unit of study must be Integrated ENL/ELA (90 minutes), while the other half a unit can be Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL/Content Area (90 minutes). Expanding level ELLs in Grades K-8 receive 180 minutes a week; one unit of study is Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area (180 minutes). Commanding level 6  ELLs, or former ELLs, in Grades K-8 must continue to receive services for an additional two years; they receive half a unit per week of Integrated ENL in ELA, or Content Area, or other approved services. Entering level ELLs in Grades 9-12 are mandated to receive 540 minutes of ENL instruction per week. One unit of study is Stand-Alone ENL (180 minutes), one unit of Integrated ENL/ELA (180 minutes) and another unit of study in either Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL in Content Area (180 minutes). Emerging ELLs in Grades 9-12 receive 360 minutes per week. One unit of study is Integrated ENL/ELA (180 minutes), one half a unit is Stand-Alone ENL (90 minutes), and the other half a unit of study can be Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL/Content Area (90 minutes). Transitioning level ELLs in Grades 9-12 are mandated to receive 180 minutes per week in ENL Instruction. One half a unit of study must be Integrated ENL/Content Area (90 minutes). The other half a unit can be Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL/Content Area (90 minutes). Expanding Level ELLs receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/Content Area instruction per week. Commanding, or former ELLs in Grades 9-12 must continue to receive services for an additional two years. They are mandated to receive half a unit of study per week of Integrated ENL in ELA/Content Area or other approved services. For all grades and instructional levels, the Stand-Alone and Integrated models are alternated daily. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In each model (Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL), content areas are delivered by engaging the ENL Teacher and Content Area Teachers in curriculum planning, implementation, and rigorous professional development. Content is made comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of common core learning standards by effectively grouping students, maximizing use of instructional time, and by integrating language development and literacy in all content areas in English and the students’ native language. All teachers of ELLs use instructional approaches and methods like cooperative learning/group work, expository learning, brainstorming, role play, differentiation, T.P.R (Total Physical Response), Think-Pair-Share, Language Experience Approach, and small group instruction to enrich language instruction. We use grade level appropriate materials that are aligned to our students’ specific, special needs in terms of their disability and instructional level. Our Standardized Assessment ELLs in grades K-3 use instructional strategies and grade-level materials such as Fundations (Orton-Gillingham multi-sensory program that provides skill development in phonics, fluency, phonemic awareness, vocabulary and spelling and decoding), Words Your Way, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Readers, Scholastic Magazine, and Reading Street. The Instruction is differentiated for all ELLs. Our Alternate Assessment ELLs in grades K-2 (non-graded) use a variety of instructional strategies and grade level materials based on TEACCH methodology. TEACCH is a therapeutic technique to help autistic individuals understand their surroundings. Such strategies and materials are Fundations, Words Your Way, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Readers, Scholastic Magazine, SMILE (a highly structured, multi-sensory program that engages complex learners in a sequential program beginning with attention and imitation tasks through phoneme and syllable learning, noun vocabulary and later, simple sentences and short stories), Headsprout (an ELA computer program), and Ablenet Focus on Science. They also participate in JARS (Joint Action Routine) which is a functional curriculum used with students with disabilities collaboratively with Speech and Language teachers. Our Standardized Assessment ELLs in grades 3-5 use instructional strategies and grade level materials such as Wilson Fundations, Reading Street, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Readers, and Scholastic Magazine. Our Alternate Assessment ELLs in grades 3-5 (non-graded) use a variety of instructional strategies and grade level materials based on TEACCH methodology. Such strategies and materials include Wilson Fundations and Fundations, SMILE, Headsprout, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Readers, Words Your Way, Scholastic Magazine, and Ablenet Focus on Science. They also participate in JARS. Our Standardized Assessment ELLs in Middle School use instructional strategies and grade level materials such as Wilson Fundations, Reading Street, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Readers, Scholastic Magazine, Read 180, and the McGraw Hill Literacy Program. They also receive two periods per week of AIS (Academic Intervention Services) and use Coach practice books. Our Alternate Assessment ELLs in Middle School (non-graded) use a variety of instructional strategies and grade level materials based on TEACCH methodology. Such strategies and materials as; Wilson Fundations and Fundations, SMILE, Words Your Way, Headsprout, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Readers, Scholastic Magazine, and Ablenet Focus on Science. They also participate in JARS (Joint Action Routine). Our Standardized Assessment ELLs in High School use Wilson Fundations, Leveled Vocabulary Books, Reading Street, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Readers, Scholastic Magazine, Read 180, and the McGraw Hill Literacy Program.Our Alternate Assessment ELLs in High School grade 9 to age 21 (non-graded) use a variety of instructional strategies and grade level materials based on the TEACCH methodology. Such strategies and materials include Wilson Fundations, Leveled Vocabulary Books, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Readers, and Scholastic Magazine. They also participate in JARS (Joint Action Routine). Our Standardized Assessment ELLs in High School 7  grade 9 to age 21 are provided with bilingual dictionaries specific to content areas. The ENL students may use these documents as supplements to their texts, as study or as references when taking the Regents examinations. Additionally, content area teachers may use the glossaries as reference in preparing lessons. They are of special value in classrooms since our teachers do not speak the targeted languages. Students may use these glossaries during subject area Regents tests. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Although our school does not have a bilingual program, our students are informally evaluated by paraprofessionals who speak their home language. Our START program, located in Syosset, collaborates with the Mercy First agency. The unaccompanied minors in this program who all speak Spanish, come from Central America, specifically Guatemala, Mexico, Honduras, and Nicaragua. Upon arrival, students are assessed by the agency using a test called Aprende. Aprende measures student competency in the following areas: Social Studies, Science, Math, and Literature. Throughout the school year, students receive content instruction in Spanish, and are tested using teacher made assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for all ELL subgroups through several methods which include, adapting and modifying materials for students in 12:1:4, 6:1:1, 12:1:1 and 8:1:1 populations (these are defined later in this document), and flexible scheduling. SIFE students are taught by using a multi-sensory and multicultural approach along with intensive literacy/language instruction in cooperative groups in a print rich environment with differentiated instruction. ENL materials are infused throughout all aspects of the instruction which SIFE students receive. They have access to libraries that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and contain supplemental materials in their native language. The libraries include a variety of books on all levels that support the backgrounds, strengths, and English language needs of our SIFE students. SIFE students work with the ENL teacher who alternates the Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL models in collaboration with the classroom teacher. The use of technology is also incorporated into the curriculum for all SIFE students. Goals are met by using instructional approaches and methods such as cooperative learning/group work, expository learning, Think-Share-Pair, Graphic Organizers, brainstorming, Realia, modeling, role play, differentiation, and small group instruction in English and in their home language. Newcomer ELLs are subject to the same Common Core Learning Standards as non-ELLs. In addition to meeting the Common Core Learning Standards, ELL students will demonstrate cross-cultural knowledge and understanding by using culturally appropriate behaviors. They are expected to have knowledge of local and United States cultures and practices in their interactions with others while in their present environment. Our ENL teachers and instructional staff adapt the curriculum to meet the needs of these students; they modify the course work and their methods of instruction as needed. IEP goals are addressed by using instructional approaches and methods like cooperative learning/group work, intensive literacy/language instruction, flexible scheduling, print rich environment, modeling, expository learning, brainstorming, Think-Pair-Share, Realia, Graphic organizers, demonstration method, role play, differentiation, and small group instruction in English and in their home language. All ELL students in grades 3-12, with less than three years of ENL services receive additional ELA Academic Intervention Services (AIS) instruction two times per week in order to prepare for the New York State ELA, Math, Science and Regents exams. The AIS instruction is given in English and in the home language when necessary. Developing ELL students that have been receiving ENL services for four to six years receive instruction aligned to the CCLS. ELL students demonstrate cross-cultural knowledge and understanding by using culturally appropriate behaviors. They are expected to have knowledge of local and United States cultures and practices in their interactions with others while in their present environment and equally participate in CCLS coursework. In an effort to meet the special needs of these students our ENL teachers and instructional staff adapt the curriculum and modify the course work and methods of instruction as needed. IEP and ELL goals are met by using instructional approaches and methods like cooperative learning/group work, intensive literacy/language instruction, flexible scheduling, print rich environment, expository learning, brainstorming, 8  modeling, role play, Realia, Think-Pair-Share, graphic organizers,differentiation, and small group instruction in English and in their home language. These students receive additional ELA Academic Intervention Services (AIS) instruction two times per week in order to prepare for the New York State exams and the New York State Regents Exams. The AIS instruction is given in English and in the home language when necessary. ELL students that have been receiving ENL services Long-Term (seven years or more) receive CCLS aligned instruction. They are expected to have knowledge of local and United States cultures and practices in their interactions with others while in their present environment and are expected to equally participate in all New York State Common Core Learning Standards for all subject areas. Our ENL teachers and instructional staff adapt the curriculum to meet the needs of these students. They modify the course work and their methods of instruction as needed. IEP and ELL goals are met by using instructional approaches and methods like cooperative learning/group work, intensive literacy/language instruction, flexible scheduling, graphic organizers, print rich environment, discovery, expository learning, brainstorming, demonstration method, role play, differentiation, and small group instruction in English and in their home language. All standardized ELL students in grades 3-12, that have been receiving ENL services Long-Term (seven years or more) receive additional ELA Academic Intervention Services (AIS) instruction two times per week in order to prepare for the New York State exams and the Regents exams; AIS instruction is given in English. Former, or Commanding level ELLs receive AIS (Academic Intervention Services) for up to two years after scoring Commanding on the NYSESLAT for extra support. These services are provided by a special education teacher. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? As stated above, In each model (Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL with an Alternate Placement Native Language Speaking Paraprofessional), content areas are delivered by engaging the ENL Teacher and Content Area Teachers in curriculum planning, implementation, and rigorous professional development. Content is made comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of common core learning standards by effectively grouping students, maximizing use of instructional time, and by integrating language development and literacy in all content areas in English and the students’ home language. All teachers of ELLs use instructional approaches and methods like cooperative learning/group work, expository learning, brainstorming, role play, differentiation, T.P.R (Total Physical Response), Think-Pair-Share, Language Experience Approach, and small group instruction to enrich language instruction. We use grade level appropriate materials that are aligned to our students’ specific, special needs in terms of their disability and instructional level. Our Standardized Assessment ELLs in grades K-3 use instructional strategies and grade-level materials such as Fundations (Orton-Gillingham multi-sensory program that provides skill development in phonics, fluency, phonemic awareness, vocabulary and spelling and decoding), Words Your Way, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Readers, Scholastic Magazine, and Reading Street. The Instruction is differentiated for all ELLs. Our Alternate Assessment ELLs in grades K-2 (non-graded) use a variety of instructional strategies and grade level materials based on TEACCH methodology. TEACCH is a therapeutic technique to help autistic individuals understand their surroundings. Such strategies and materials are Fundations, Words Your Way, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Readers, Scholastic Magazine, SMILE (a highly structured, multi-sensory program that engages complex learners in a sequential program beginning with attention and imitation tasks through phoneme and syllable learning, noun vocabulary and later, simple sentences and short stories), Headsprout (an ELA computer program), and Ablenet Focus on Science. They also participate in JARS (Joint Action Routine) which is a functional curriculum used with students with disabilities collaboratively with Speech and Language teachers. Our Standardized Assessment ELLs in grades 3-5 use instructional strategies and grade level materials such as Wilson Foundations, Reading Street, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Readers, and Scholastic Magazine. Our Alternate Assessment ELLs in grades 3-5 (non-graded) use a variety of instructional strategies and grade level materials based on TEACCH methodology. Such strategies and materials include Wilson Fundations and Fundations, SMILE, Headsprout, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Readers, Words Your Way, Scholastic Magazine, and Ablenet Focus on Science. They also participate in JARS. Our Standardized Assessment ELLs in Middle School use instructional strategies and grade level materials such as Wilson Fundations, Reading Street, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Readers, Scholastic Magazine, Read 180, and the McGraw Hill Literacy Program. They also receive two periods per week of AIS (Academic Intervention Services) and use Coach practice books. Our Alternate Assessment ELLs in Middle School (non-graded) use a variety of instructional strategies and grade level materials based on TEACCH methodology. Such strategies and materials as; Wilson Fundations and Fundations, SMILE, Words Your Way, Headsprout, 9  Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Readers, Scholastic Magazine, and Ablenet Focus on Science. They also participate in JARS (Joint Action Routine). Our Standardized Assessment ELLs in High School use Wilson Fundations, Leveled Vocabulary Books, Reading Street, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Readers, Scholastic Magazine, Read 180, and the McGraw Hill Literacy Program.Our Alternate Assessment ELLs in High School grade 9 to age 21 (non-graded) use a variety of instructional strategies and grade level materials based on the TEACCH methodology. Such strategies and materials include Wilson Fundations, Leveled Vocabulary Books, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Readers, and Scholastic Magazine. They also participate in JARS (Joint Action Routine). 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable diverse ELLs with disabilities to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. This is attained by using Special Education strategies and methodologies that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and are cross curricular. Instruction is provided in a District 75, Special Education setting in accordance with the child’s IEP. The teacher uses a Stand-Alone ENL and/or Integrated ENL model. Small student to teacher ratio affords us scheduling flexibility and the capability to provide instruction using appropriate scaffolding techniques while placing a high value on culture and student diversity . Student groupings are utilized in order to provide access to meaningful instruction. Special techniques and individual plans aid us in providing quality instruction to our ELL students with disabilities; such as TEACCH (a therapeutic technique to help autistic individuals understand their surroundings), Power of Choice Behavioral Modification System, FBAs (Functional Behavior Assessments), BIPs (Behavioral Intervention Plan), SWISS (School Wide Information System),and PBIS, (Positive Intervention Behavior Support), along with Vocabulary and Language Development, Guided Interaction, Meta-Cognition and Authentic Assessment, Explicit Instruction, Meaning-Based Context and Universal Themes, Modeling, Graphic Organizers, and Visuals. To place ELL-SWDs in ICT classes, the Pupil Personnel Team (Principal, Assistant Principal, Related Service Providers, ENL teacher, inclusion teacher, and classroom teacher) meet to discuss the student’s progress and determine if the ICT class is the proper setting for the student. If it is agreed upon, a meeting is scheduled with the parent, a translator who speaks the home language, the student, and the PPT. In this meeting, proper support for the student is discussed. In order to enable ELL-SWDs to acheive their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment, teacher teams, as well as inquiry teams meet in order to discuss student needs and progress. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Intervention programs that are offered at P 256 Q for ELLs in all subgroups (SIFE, Newcomers, Developing, Long Term and former ELLs) in ELA are Fundations, Wilson Reading System, Read 180, JARS, Scholastic Magazine, Words your Way, Headsprout, Reading Street, McGraw Hill Reading Programs, AIS, SMILE and Weekly Reader. Interventions used in Math are Brain Pop, NY Coach, STEMS, and Math Steps. Interventions used in Science are Ablenet Focus on Science, and Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Readers. These interventions are offered in English with the assistance of the ENL teacher and an Alternate Placement Paraprofessional when necessary and are all aligned to the CCLS. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on feedback from our recent PPO, 256Q will be placing a stronger emphasis on student assessment; specifically student self-assessment. This will initiate during staff PLC's; as well as, in staff professional development. We expect these discussions to produce specific products that will evidence the academic growth of our students and can also be used when showing progress towards our CEP goals as well. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have not had a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs (during school and after school) in accordance with their IEPs and the Chancellor's Regulations. Some of our ELLs participate in our Title III program, CHAMPS, and BEACON. ELL parents are invited 0  to all parent and school meetings in their home language. Fliers are provided via the Parent Coordinator in the student’s home language so that parents are aware. The Title III after school supplemental language instructional program for English Language Learners in the residential treatment program at the Mercy First site in Syosset runs for 11 sessions throughout the school year. The program runs from 9:30AM to 1:30 PM on Saturdays. Instruction is delivered in English using ENL methodologies. This supplemental language instructional program, titled “Exploring Cultures in the ENL Classroom: Building English Language Skills Through the Arts” focuses on supporting students who are reading below their grade level while fostering the acquisition of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English. The program focuses on cooking lessons that foster language acquisition and the development of independent living skills. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. To support ELLs, our school uses a variety of instructional materials, including technology. Many classrooms have a Smart Board, some ELLs use AACs (Augmentative Communication Devices) as per their IEP, and all ELL students have access to Apple MacBook Pro laptops and iPads with Touch Screens. Teachers of ELLs with autism use the Boardmaker computer program to create Mayer-Johnson picture cues, color printers and laminators to make content accessible for students. Instructionally, we utilize Wilson Fundations, NYSAA Pacing calendar, teacher made materials, I-Pads (specific language programs), collaborative materials made with the classroom teacher, and any specific manipulatives used by our related services support staff such as Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, and Speech and Language Therapy. In addition, depending on the age/grade of the ELL students and his/her IEP, the following instructional materials (in alignment to the CCLS) may be used: Wilson Fundations/Foundations, Words Your Way, Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Readers, Scholastic Magazine, Reading Street, SMILE, Headsprout, Ablenet Focus on Science, JARS, McGraw Hill Literacy Program. In the content area, students can use bilingual dictionaries, adapted and abridged texts, and teacher-made adapted materials.Picture word walls in both English and the student’s home language are available in the classrooms. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ELL students that have special needs make up all of our ELLs. We use the Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL models only. Home language support is delivered by using modified instructional, functional curriculum that is tailored to meet their ENL needs in all content areas, grade levels, and disability in accordance with their IEPs and the Common Core Learning Standards. Students who, as per their IEP, should receive Bilingual services, but do not because our school does not offer it, have a home language speaking paraprofessional in the classroom throughout the day and when receiving ENL services. As previously stated, students may use bilingual dictionaries, adapted and abridged texts, and teacher-made adapted materials.Picture word walls in both English and the student’s home language are available in the classrooms. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. As previously stated, ELL students that have special needs make up all of our ELLs. We use the Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL models only. Instruction is delivered by using a modified instructional, functional curriculum that is tailored to meet their ENL needs in all content areas, grade levels, and disability in accordance with their IEPs and the Common Core Learning Standards. Children who, as per their IEP, should receive Bilingual services, but do not because our school does not offer it, have a native language speaking paraprofessional in the classroom throughout the day and when receiving ENL services. All required services are ensured by IEP mandates, annual reviews, data collection, teacher collaboration, team meetings, and LPT meetings. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Principals meet at building council meetings to identify common trends and discuss specific resources that may be shared across all school communities. At times it can be difficult to establish commonalities due to student ratios that must be maintained; however, efforts will be made to work out wherever it may be possible to do so. 1  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, newly enrolled ELL students and their parents are invited to come to school and meet with their ENL teacher, the parent coordinator, and the classroom teacher. They receive a letter in their home language inviting them. Throughout the school year ELLs and their parents are invited to all PA meetings, workshops organized by the parent coordinator, parent/teacher Conferences, and IEP meetings. The parents receive letters in their home language and interpreters are provided when needed. Additionally, in the summer, All ELLs are invited to attend the Chapter 683 summer school program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? P256Q offers (first year) Spanish as a language elective to our Standardized Assessment High School students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our school does not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All ELL personnel at our school attend professional development four to five times during the school year. These personnel include: Assistant Principals, Bilingual/ENL Coordinators, Paraprofessionals, Classroom Teachers (Special Education and General Education), Common branch teachers, ENL Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Speech Therapists, Occupational Therapists, Physical Therapists, and the Parent Coordinator. These workshops are offered through District 75 and at the school level. They cover NYSESLAT testing, NYSITELL testing, ENL methodologies, and compliance information. The ENL teacher and the ENL Liaison attend these workshops. On the school level, all staff members attend three workshops per school year on the Common Core Learning Standards, balanced literacy, content area instruction, and formative and summative assessments that incorporate using ENL methodologies. Many of our teachers require the mandate of 10 hours of Jose P. training. If the training is taken within, the District 75 teachers are provided with two, five hour sessions and given a certificate as proof of participation. Certificates are kept on file at the main site. As per the new UFT contract, professional development half days are provided throughout the school year. To support ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards, the District offers several ENL and Bilingual teacher Professional Development sessions. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. At P256Q, the three ENL teachers will provide the mandated 15% of total hours for all teachers and administrators. The ENL teachers will provide professional development that specifically addresses the needs of ELLs including language acquisition, best practices for co-teaching strategies, and integrating language and content instruction. The three ENL teachers will receive the required minimum of 50% at workshops provided by the District 75 Office of English Language Learners, and the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support that are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content instruction, best practices for co-teaching strategies, and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. 2  To better assist teachers in their classrooms this year, the ENL teachers put together a PD where they assisted teachers in creating class specific tools to address the various needs that they may encounter in alignment with the CCLS. Other topics that are planned for presentations include but are not limited to Incorporating ELLs into Danielson 3b and 1e, Reciprocal Teaching, Bloom’s Taxonomy, and curriculum support. Administrators keep records of all professional development activities through the use of attendance sheets, workshop agendas, and presenter evaluation forms. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P256Q provides annual individual meetings with all parents of ELLs. The meetings will take place throughout the year on selected half-days that are dedicated to Parent Engagement activities. The three ENL teachers will schedule parent meetings by site in the presence of a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent of guardian best understands. The ENL teacher will discuss with the parent the goals of the ENL program at P256Q, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. For parents and/or guardians who do not speak English, an in-person or over the phone interpreter may be provided to assist them in answering any questions they may have, and assist in overall communication needs. NYCDOE provides free translation services for critical documents that contain information for parents about their child’s education. Documents can be translated into Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, French, Haitian-Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish, and Urdu. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are a valuable resource for our ENL teacher and classroom teachers because they have essential information about their children that is vital for planning meaningful educational experiences. A monthly calendar is distributed that contains all the workshops that are being offered that month. Workshops include Cookshop, SSI Benefits, Anti-Violence and Gang Awareness, and a Health Fair. As stated above, for parents and/or guardians who do not speak English, an in-person or over the phone interpreter may be provided to assist them in answering any questions they may have, and assist in overall communication needs. NYC DOE provides free translation services for critical documents that contain information for parents about their child’s education. Documents can be translated into Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, French, Haitian-Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish, and Urdu. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Robert Lopez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P256Q School DBN: 75Q256 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Robert Lopez Title Principal Sharon McGreevy Assistant Principal Donna Tuffuor Parent Coordinator Lisamarie TagallieGurneet Kaur ENL/Bilingual Teacher Al Hiller Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Mary Keane Other Testing Coordinator Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/19/17 10/19/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75Q256 School Name: PS 256Q Superintendent: Ketler Louissai The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Donna Tuffuor Parent Coordinator Yes No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P256Q uses the Translation and Interpretation Unit at the Department of Education. This unit aims to improve the way the NYC Department of Education communicates and engages with limited-English proficient parents. The Unit provides our school with an internal resource for accessing written translation, on-site interpretation, and over-the-phone interpretation services. The Unit is also responsible for spearheading all efforts related to language access, including training and awareness of language access requirements and available resources, monitoring compliance, and oversight of designated, school-based translation funds. In addition to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, we utilize the Home Language Identification Survey, Informal Oral Interview in English/Native Language and data from ATS reports, specifically the RDGS and RHLA to identify the different languages that are spoken in our students’ homes. Our Parent Coordinator is essential in the process of identifying the parent population that has Limited English Proficiency. The Parent Coordinator also provides parents/caregivers with necessary information such as brochures, community resources such as the local library, 6  community centers, bilingual websites and other useful links to support their children in enhancing their English language skills across all domains. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Chinese (any) Cantonese Haitian Creole English Punjabi Polish Portuguese Spanish Tamil Urdu 1 7 5 0 1 566 1 3 1 93 2 1 0.15 1.03 0.73 0 0.15 83.11 0.15 0.44 0.15 13.66 0.29 0.15 1 8 3 2 2 563 1 3 1 95 2 1 0.15 1.17 0.44 0.29 0.29 82.67 0.15 0.44 0.15 13.95 0.29 0.15 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Bill of Parents Rights and Responsibilities As needed Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translated Parent's Bill or Rights can be located at NYSED.gov in the following languages: Albanian, Arabic, Bengali, Burmese, Chinese 7  Title III program letter One week prior to program start (tentative start date) Parent teacher conference notification Spring and Fall IEP notification letter 8 weeks prior to IEP meeting (simplified), Chinese (traditional), English, French, German, Haitian, Italian, Hindi, Karen, Khmer, Korean, Nepali, Portuguese (Brazil). Portuguese (Portugal), Punjabi, Russian, Somali, Spanish, Swahili, Ukrainian, Urdu, Uzbek, and Vietnamese Our title III program is located at our residential high school, Mercy First. Due to the nature of the agency, the agency acts as the students' guardian, therefore, staff members are bilingual in English and Spanish, therefore translation is not needed. Translated conference notifications are available on the NYC DOE intranet in the following languages: Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, French, Haitian-Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish, and Urdu. IEP notification letters are available on SESIS in the following languages: Arabic, Bengali, French, Haitian-Creole, Korean, and Urdu. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent teacher conferences Fall and Spring Title III Program Two weeks prior to start date (tentative) interpretation service(s)? A paraprofessional, or staff member who speaks the parent/child's home language will be available to provide interpretation during parent teacher conferences. If a staff member is not available for a specific language, school personnel will call the Translation and Interpretation Unit at (718) 752-7373 to access over the phone interpretation in over 200 languages. Our title III program is located at our residential high school, Mercy First. Due to the nature of the agency, the agency 8  IEP Meeting Ongoing Parent Counseling/ Training Ongoing acts as the students' guardian, therefore, staff is bilingual in English and Spanish, and interpretation services are not needed. A paraprofessional, or staff member who speaks the parent/child's home language will be available to provide interpretation during IEP meetings. If a staff member is not available for a specific language, school personnel will call the Translation and Interpretation Unit at (718) 752-7373 to access over the phone interpretation in over 200 languages. A paraprofessional, or staff member who speaks the parent/child's home language will be available to provide interpretation during parent counseling/training. If a staff member is not available for a specific language, school personnel will call the Translation and Interpretation Unit at (718) 752-7373 to access over the phone interpretation in over 200 languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, the Bilingual staff members provide language translation services at P256Q. If staff members at our school cannot provide interpretation, a staff member at the school calls the Translation and Interpretation Unit at (718) 752-7373 to access over-the-phone interpretation in over 200 languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At 256Q, parents are informed of the availability and access to language assistance services. Each school site is provided with a Language Access Kit from the Translation and Interpretation Unit. A multilingual welcome poster is displayed in the main office at each school site. Parents/guardians can indicate the language they speak from the Language Identification Guide. Once their language is identified, the parent/guardian is then given a Language Palm Card. During Teacher conferences, ENL Teachers send out a memo to the administration for the information to be disseminated among all staff members pertaining to translation and interpretation services available to Parents of ENL students 9  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) To fulfill Section VII of the Chancellor's Regulations A-663, our Parent Coordinator is essential regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services. The Parent Coordinator as well as the ENL Teacher(s) are required to contact the Language Translation and Interpretation Unit via email or phone in the event that a non-English speaking parent and/or guardian needs to communicate with the school staff regarding their child and there is no one available in the building who speaks their home language. Additionally, important school documents, communication with Parents during various school events/activities must be translated in order to be accessible to all parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? P256Q will use the NYC School Survey for Parents to gather feedback on the quality and availability of services. The survey is provided to Parents in the 10 languages offered by the NYCDOE: English, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, French, Haitian-Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish, and Urdu. The survey will assess whether or not P256Q is communicating with Parents in their native language. Informal interviews, parent association meetings, and collaboration with counselors/teachers on the daily point sheets will aid in collecting feedback. 0 
