2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 27Q260 School Name: FREDERICK DOUGLASS ACADEMY VI HIGH SCHOOL Principal: CHARLES OGUNDIMU 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information FREDERICK DOUGLASS ACADEMY VI 27Q260 342700011270 9-12 School Number (DBN): 8-21 BAY 25 TH STREET, FAR ROCKAWAY, NY 11691 718-471-2154 718-471-2890 Phone Number: DR. CHARLES OGUNDIMU Fax: Email Address: COGUNDI@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: DR. CHARLES OGUNDIMU MR. FRANTZ NAZAIRE MS. NICOLAWALKER MS. NICOLAWALKER SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: MR. EUTON CLARKE ASHLEY SANTOS DANIEL OVERO LAURIE ZENO (QLA) District Information 27 Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: JUAN MENDEZ Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place, Flushing, NY 11354, ELINDSE@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: ((718) 281-7696 Phone Number: 718-281-7690 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Queens South FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard Queens, NY 11416 Mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) DR. CHARLES OGUNDIMU MR. FRANTZ NAZAIRE (Chapter Leader) MS. NICOLAWALKER MS. BRUNILDAFERNANDEZ MR. EUTON CLARKE ASHLEY SANTOS DANIEL OVERO MS. DEBORAH MAHONEY MS. NICOLE WALKER *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ FDA VI Parent PA President 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name MS. KERRY REECE MS. JACQUELINE CLARKE Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) FDA VI Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Rooted in the belief that every child CAN and WILL learn in a conducive learning environment, our mission is to inspire students to achieve the highest standards of intellectual and personal development in an academically challenging environment enriched with support, encouragement and assistance. As a community of learners, we strive for excellence, unlocking the full potential of each individual, developing confident and independent learners.” 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. FDA VI: School Community : Our four grades, comprised of approximately 362 students, represent the racially and ethnically diverse demographic of the Far Rockaway community. We are also proud to service English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. We embrace this diverse student body since it aligns with the idea stated in our mission statement that “every child CAN and WILL learn.” To further promote this belief, we have partnered with a number of talented community based organizations such as the Rockaway Development Revitalization Organization (RDRC) which is dedicated to promoting the revitalization of the Rockaway’s economic base and assisting residents in securing an improved quality of life. This organization has diligently worked with FDA VI, since the school’s inception in helping students with volunteer opportunities, job readiness, and college preparation. Queens District Attorney/Queens Law Associates provides social justice enrichment to our students and aims to deter our students from lifestyles that would prevent them from becoming productive members of society as well as inspiring them towards academic excellence. Finally, the Queens Library for Teens will support academic achievement by offering Regents preparation assistance and events that will help our students become college and career ready. School Strengths & Accomplishments : Our strengths include structures for a positive learning environment, an inclusive culture, and a focus on student success. Also, our school-level theory of action and goals shared by the school community creates an environment in which all stakeholders are involved. Our accomplishments include introducing 3 Advanced Placement (AP) courses as well as introducing a 4th AP course in the 2017-18 school year. Finally, we align our use of resources to support instructional goals that meet students’ needs. As evidenced in the findings of the 2016-17 Quality Review, School leaders support teacher development with effective feedback and next steps from frequent classroom observation cycles, often by a pair of administrators. An effective system drives the use of teacher observation data in the design and facilitation of professional development   Observation data are a core component of professional development planning for the school. For example, a review of 2016 observation reports showed Danielson component 3b “Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques,” on which most teachers had received feedback, as an area of concern. As a result, the school provided multiple professional development opportunities in 2017. A schoolwide push for incorporating the Question Formulation Technique (QFT) was supported through whole staff professional development as well as individual and team supports. A November 2016 training facilitated by an assistant principal provided clear purpose for the focus on using QFT in the classroom and rooted the training in the needs of the school. An additional professional development focus has been a rigorous exploration of the full Danielson rubric through intervisitation, involving teachers rating each other utilizing the rubric. School leaders will continue this practice in the 2017-18 school year. Areas of Focus & Challenges: 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  Our areas of focus and challenges include perfecting our curricula and assessment planning to align with the Common Core Learning Standards. We are also striving to implement research-based, effective instruction that yields high quality. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. ENL students who do not speak any English. These students need support both in language acquisition and content. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In reference to the Framework for Great Schools, the school has made progress in Effective Leadership Practices as evidenced in the findings of the 2016-17 Quality Review. Additionally, the school has made progress in fostering a Supportive Environment for students. As we continue to foster a supportive environment for all of the schools' stakeholders, our continued focus for 2017-18 will be Rigorous Instruction and Student Achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q260 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 349 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 38 36 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 20 17 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 75.4% % Reduced Lunch 18.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 42.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.12 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 52% 44% 41.3% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Yes N/A 68 73 80.8% 1.1% 19.2% 52.7% 2.0% 1.7% 4 39% 8.7 N/A N/A 52% 48% 59.7% 3% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  2018-19 SCEP-P 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS – RIGOROUS INSTRUCTION 1. SOP 3.3 & 3.5: All teachers are engaged in collaborative practice using inquiry. A review of agendas and accompanying meeting minutes, along with evidence gathered during classroom observations, evidences that all teacher teams are using protocols in their analysis of student work and data to build coherence around promoting the shared instructional goal and schoolwide focus to improve students’ reading and writing. The impact of this work thus far is evident in the reported increased use of data to move instruction and support student academic growth in all content areas. 2. SOP 3.2: Teachers report and can speak to the use of data in all their planning and revision. Teachers also speak to the support of administrators for their team work. School leaders review team meeting notes on the school’s shared drive and offer feedback on process. An example of administrator feedback to teams is, “In addition to analyzing student work, it is important during the tuning protocol that you focus on problems of practice. If instructions are not explicit, students will fall short of meeting the standard. At the start of the protocol, when the presenter explains the task, ask clarifying questions. After receiving feedback the presenter can ask for suggestions to improve practice and student outcomes.” School leaders work with the Inquiry Teams and sit with and assess the quality of work, providing guidance and actionable next steps. We use classroom observations to further assess the quality of PD and teacher team work. Additionally, every professional development workshop is followed by teacher feedback to glean what worked and didn’t work, leading to the adjustment of PD planning for subsequent sessions. 2018-19 SCEP-P 15  3. SOP 3.3: & 3.4: For the 2016/2017 school year, Grade Level Inquiry Teams used item analysis from the January 2017 Regents to identify gaps in student learning, creating an inquiry focus. Included in the inquiry focus of each team is a target population, an analysis of student work, and a proposed strategy to bridge the learning gap. Teachers use data from student work to analyze growth and inform next steps. NEEDS – RIGOROUS INSTRUCTION 1. Teachers need to learn how to conduct less teacher-dominated lessons in favor of more student-led discussions and discovery learning. Student engagement in the form of student-centered learning/pedagogy will be one of our paramount foci this school year. 2. Continued alignment of curricula to CCLS. 3. Continued alignment of teacher professional development with stated curricula/pedagogical goals and objectives. 4. Continued improvement in school climate, tone, and culture with a particular emphasis on student behavior in the classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 GOALS FOR IMPROVING STUDENT OUTCOMES AND SCHOOL PERFORMANCE – RIGOROUS INSTRUCTION 1. Throughout the 2018-19 school year, all teachers will receive professional development workshops on how to improve student engagement through more student-centered pedagogy. This will be measured through observations, scholarship reports and regents results. 2. Throughout the 2018-19 school year, our teachers will create common assessments aligned to curricula, CCLS in teacher teams. 3. Using data from benchmark assessments and Regents results, teachers will meet weekly in vertical teacher teams develop CCLS-aligned unit plans which school leaders will assess using the Tri-State Rubric. 4. Throughout the 2018-19 school year, teachers will provide actionable feedback to students immediately following our regularly scheduled assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-P 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). SOP 3.3 & 3.5: To foster rigorous instruction and student achievement, PD will be used to train teachers in effectively planning and/or revising curricula and lesson plans based on the CCLS and Danielson Framework. PD will also target creating modifications for ELLs and SWDs. All teachers September 2018 – June 2019 SOP 3.2, 3.3, 3.5: To foster rigorous instruction, teacher collaboration and student achievement, teachers will work collaboratively in vertical teacher teams on writing/revising curricula and lesson plans based on the CCLS and Danielson Framework and creating modifications for ELLs and SWDs All teachers September 2018 – June 2019 SOP 3.2 & 3.4: Peer review and feedback sessions will be scheduled so that teachers and administrators can work collaboratively to revise curricula and lessons plans. All teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers AP Supervision, School administration, Borough Support Center All teachers APs Supervision, School administration, Borough Support Center All teachers APs Supervision, School administration, Borough Support Center 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. SLT MEETINGS AND MONTHLY PTA MEETINGS Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources in the form of school personnel, and external PD providers. Financial resources such as funds from Tax Levy and Title I School Wide Project Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50 % of teachers’ lesson plans will show improvement by incorporating the elements of effective planning. School leaders will assess using the tri-state rubric, January 2019 regents data and data from classroom observations. In addition, at least 25% of teachers’ supervisory written feedback will demonstrate improvement in competencies within Domain 1. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress will include Danielson Framework for Teaching, Advance, scholarship reports, Regents scores, classroom observations and feedback to teachers. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? STRENGTHS – SUPPORTIVE ENVIRONMENT 1. SOP 5.3 & 5.5: Our school provides multiple opportunities to enhance student-learning experiences towards the promotion of a supportive learning environment as evidenced by our school vision: “To educate the WHOLE CHILD to be college and career ready.” This vision is understood and embraced by all stakeholders. 2. SOP 5.4 & 5.5: The hiring of a SAPIS (Substance Abuse Prevention and Intervention Specialist) toward the end of the 2015-16 school year has reinforced the emphasis on strengthening the supportive environment aspect of the Framework for Great Schools. 3. SOP 5.4 & 5.5: As a campus school, we are part of the partnership with school clinic housed within the campus. This is a fully functional health facility that many of our students utilized regularly – particularly the social work counseling service. 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  4. SOP 5.2, 5.4 & 5.5: Strong structures are in place to facilitate the use of data to address student social and emotional developmental health needs. For example, students Individualized Educational Plans (IEPs) are available to Integrated Co-Teachers (ICT). This is important because in order to create and sustain a supportive classroom environment, teachers must be cognizant of individual student needs – particularly students with IEPs. 5. SOP 5.2: A consultant from Goldmansaur & Rutherford works with ICT teams on creating and implementing effective unit and lesson plans utilizing parallel and station teaching. 6. SOP 5.5: A consultant from Center for Educational Innovation (CEI) works with ENL teachers to ensure ENL students have access to curriculum. NEEDS 1. SOP 5.4: We need to create a student handbook with important information about FDA VI, who is who?, etc. 2. SOP 5.3: We need to build more support for better student-teacher relationships in the classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we expect overall school attendance rate to increase from79.4% in December 2018 to 82%. By June 2019, we will establish a system that allows each student to be supported by a designated adult as evidenced by 85% of students responding affirmatively to this question in the end of year Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) SOP 5.2, 5.3, 5.4 & 5.5: Our after school pm program will afford us more direct interpersonal contact between staff and students. Programs will be customized to the individual needs of each student. Weekly case conferencing will enhance relationships between teachers and students allowing us to monitor student progress more closely Any student(s) in need of academic, social, and/or emotional intervention SOP 5.2, 5.4 & 5.5: Our after school clubs, including the tech club and music club will create a collaborative environment among students and staff. Clubs meet regularly to promote communication between students and staff. Any interested students. SOP 5.2, 5.4 & 5.5: Our “Adopt-A-Student Campaign” (AASC) will assign five students to each teacher to act as a mentor for the students as well as tracking their progress towards graduation. SOP 5.2, 5.3, 5.4 & 5.5: Town hall meetings will occur monthly to afford students a voice in the events of the school Teachers, guidance counselors, school administrators Students, teachers, guidance counselors, school administrators September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, guidance counselors, school administrators September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, guidance counselors, school administrators September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, guidance counselors, school administrators September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, guidance counselors, school administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly PTA Meetings, invite parents to be guest speakers in College and Career Readiness Seminar Classes, continued drive to have parents register and use Pupilpath and continued use of Blackboard Connect to communicate with parents. Tonie Roberts, Parent Coordinator and Nicola Walker, PA President will drive these initiatives. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources will include teachers, students, and parents for the positive intervention team, and administrators for supervision. Instructional resources include literature on positive intervention strategies, meeting protocols, agendas and sign in sheets. Scheduling will include weekly meetings for the positive intervention team, bi-weekly meetings for the events committee, and two town hall meetings, one in February for the roll out of the positive school culture initiative and one in April for monitoring of impact of the initiative. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A baseline survey will be administered in September. In March, a midterm survey will demonstrate a minimum of 10% increase in the percentage of students responding that ‘they know who to go to for academic and social and emotional support’. By January 2019, there will be at least a 5% reduction in suspensions and/or safety incidents in OORS. By June 2019, there will be a 7% reduction in suspensions and/or safety incidents compared to 2017-18. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student feedback in the form of surveys before and after any activity. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTH(S) 1. The school is working towards developing classroom practices that foster higher order thinking around student discussion. This effort is providing student opportunities to be engaged in groups with others through meaningful discussion. (2015 Quality Review). NEEDS 2. Excerpts from our most recent state recommendations report and quality review report capture our needs in this area: ● Use a variety of data sources such as formative and summative assessments to inform instructional planning. Use instructional practices and strategies that are aligned to unit and lesson plans, include accommodations for students with disabilities, support the linguistic needs of English language learners, and provide instructional interventions to 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  students that lead to inquiry and engagement. Create short and long term goals for students based on grade-level benchmarks that lead to student involvement in their own learning (sub statement 4.2). ● Although many classes reflected grouping practices for the purpose of engaging students in discussion, several teachers’ voices out-weighed the students’, reflecting an uneven balance of question and response as informed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching and embedded in the instructional shifts. The inconsistency of student opportunities for meaningful discussion hinders the ability for all students to be engaged purposefully in the curricula. Teaching practices to support struggling students were not made evident consistently across classrooms, which led to uneven levels of engagement, impeding students’ ability to fully demonstrate higher order thinking skills for specific learning task Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 65% of teachers will demonstrate movement in at least one of the three competencies within Domain 3; questioning and discussion techniques (3B), engaging students in learning (3C), and using assessment in instruction (3D). This will be measured by official feedback from observation reports and the final teacher rating on the MOTP indicator. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Professional development will train teachers in strategies for implementing competencies 3b, 3c, and 3d in their planning and in the classroom to benefit all students including English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students With Disabilities (SWDs). Teacher Teams will meet weekly to allow teachers to collaborate on planning to effectively incorporate 3b, 3c, and 3d into their lesson plans while also making modifications for ELLs and SWDs. Frequent cycles of classroom observations and specific and actionable feedback from administrators will be used to monitor and assess teachers’ use of the competencies in their lesson plans and in the classroom. Teachers will be encouraged to inter-visit with each other in their classrooms to observe best practices and those at staff meetings All Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 All Teachers, School Administrators All Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 All Teachers, School Administrators All Teachers, School Administrators All Teachers, School Administrators Sept 2018-June 2019 All Teachers, School Administrators Sept 2018-June 2019 All Teachers, School Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From September 2018 to June 2019, teachers, school administrators and guidance counselors will regularly contact students' homes through Blackboard Connect - a software program that can send text, email, and voicemail in English, and Spanish. We will also use regular phone calls as well as Skedula - another software that we use to record grades, take attendance, and communicate with parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The staff meets for Professional Development (PD) every Monday and Tuesday from 7:30 A.M. – 8:20 A.M. Needed resources will include laptops, and professional books. Teacher teams will be driven by school leaders and SIG-funded vendors including Teaching Matters, Goldmansour Consultation, and Cambridge Education. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded X SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmark for monitoring progress: By February 2019 % of teachers will demonstrate improvement in at least one of the competencies from Domain 3 as indicated on observation reports. Time frame for mid-point progress monitoring: February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Classroom observation reports as indicated in Advance; teacher feedback. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS – EFFECTIVE SCHOOL LEADERSHIP 1. The principal makes decisions to align key resources in ways that promote the achievement of school wide goals and support professional collaboration to strengthen instructional capacity. {Excerpts from our most recent Quality Review} 2. School leadership is adept at using student data, feedback from formal and informal observations, and professional development opportunities connected to improvement plans and conversations to provide supports to teachers and other staff members. {Excerpts from our most recent Quality Review}. 3. School leadership is adept at conducting periodic check-ins of other staff members, especially those supporting subgroups of students who are experiencing achievement and developmental lags, i.e., special education and English language learner teachers. Ensure that check-ins lead to an understanding of the next steps that are necessary to yield a positive year-end evaluation rating (sub statement 2.5). {Excerpts from our most recent Quality Review}. 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  NEEDS – EFFECTIVE SCHOOL LEADERSHIP 1. School leadership needs to set clearer expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development. {Learning Environment Survey) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will develop, implement and monitor a code of conduct uilitzing PBIS and Restorative Practices to modify behavioral expectations resulting in 10% reduction in suspensions and/or safety incidents in OORS. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) SOP 2.3 & 2.5: We will initiate a positive intervention school team to strategize about creating a positive school culture. Included in the team’s plan will be a reward system to reinforce positive student behavior such as wearing school uniforms. Students, teachers, administrators, parents. Sept 2018-June 2019 AP Supervision Teachers, Guidance, SAPIS SOP 2.3, 2.3 & 2.5: PD will be used to train teachers and staff in positive intervention measures utilizing PBIS and Restorative Practice. SOP 2.5: The events committee will plan student and school activities to promote a positive school culture and student achievement. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers and staff. Sept 2018-June 2019 BFSC Adminstration Teachers BFSC Adminstration Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Students, Parent Volunteers N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Between September 2018 and June 2019, through school events, such as coffee with the principal, attendance and academic recognition awards ceremonies, etc., we will engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources will include teachers, students, and parents for the positive intervention team, and administrators for supervision. Instructional resources include literature on positive intervention strategies, meeting protocols, agendas and sign in sheets. Scheduling will include weekly meetings for the positive intervention team, bi-weekly meetings for the events committee, and two town hall meetings, one in February for the roll out of the positive school culture initiative and one in April for monitoring of impact of the initiative. 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be at least a 5% reduction in suspensions and/or safety incidents in OORS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By April 2019, 75% of teachers will be using the new lesson planning template correctly. By June 2019, 85% of the teachers will receive Effective ratings in planning and preparation and designing coherent instruction as measured by observation reports in Advance. By June 2019, through our restorative Practices and Youth Court systems, we expect to reduce Level 5 infractions by 10%. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS – STRONG FAMILY AND COMMUNITY TIES 1. Our Strong Family And Community Ties’ score on the Framework for Great Schools metric increased from 2.36 in 2014-15 to 3.32 in 2015-16. This represents an increase of 0.96 in one academic year and also indicates that we are “meeting target” in this category. {Framework for Great Schools Report 2016} 2. Our score on Strong Family-Community Ties in the Learning Environment Survey increased from 70% in 2014-15 to 81% in 2015-16. {Framework for Great Schools Report 2016} 3. More than 85% of parents responded positively to the question: “How satisfied are you with the education that your child has received this year?” {NYC Learning Environment Survey 2016} 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  4. Close to 100% of parents responded positively to the question: “How satisfied are you with the response you get when you contact your child's school?” {NYC Learning Environment Survey 2016} NEEDS 1. We need to improve our translation services to families whose dominant language is not English. 2. We need to do more outreach to parents and families so as to improve family engagement. 3. There is also the need for more collaborative engagement with our CBOs - RDRC, Queens Law Associates, etc. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, to increase parental engagement, as evidenced by a 20% increase in the percentage of parents who attend parent-teacher conferences in the spring (as compared to the fall). 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will strengthen our current translation approach to include tracking parents’ first languages and ways to translate documents sent to families from school that will make such documents accessible to them. In addition to our traditional methods for parental outreach - letters and regular phone calls - we will continue to use Skedula, Blackboard phone messenger, as well as home visits. Parents, guardians, families Sept 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, school administration Parents, guardians, families Sept 2018-June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parent Coordinator, school administration, attendance teacher, attendance improvement committee. School administration, Borough field office, educational consultant(s). On-going PD on strengthening school-family-community relations, such as language access training for parent coordinators, understanding the McKinney-Veto Act, improving parental engagement, etc. School personnel Sept 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Rockaway Development Revitalization Corporation (RDRC) Queens Law Associates Queens Library Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Human, capital, and financial resources, funding for professional development for staff, funding for per session to support teachers who may have to attend PD after-school hours, funds for books to foster/enhance PD, funds to print and mail documents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be at least a 5% increase in the number of parents who will report an improvement in communication with our school as measured by overall positive survey response. By June 2019, there will be at least a 3% average increase in overall positive survey response rate in the Strong Family-Community Ties metric on the NYC Learning Environment Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Weekly and monthly monitoring by parent coordinator and reporting to the Principal. By February 2019, parent coordinator phone log entries and parent Skedula access will increase by 10%. Also, the Learning Environment Survey results, regular monitoring of parental feedback. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Throughout the 2018-19 school year FDA VI high school will implement ELT to provide enriching before-and –after-school educational activities to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Our ELT will focus on deepening student understanding and acceptance of what it means to be college and career ready. Examples will include: College Now, PM School, Saturday Tutoring, Holiday School, and various excursions to colleges, and industries. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. PM school and other credit-recovery programs will be compulsory. Visits to colleges and industries will be voluntary. We will actively encourage all students to participate in the voluntary ELT activities by highlighting (to students and families) the benefits of participating in such activities. We will also provide students and families enough time to prepare for such activities in case it requires some preparation. Finally, where cost is a factor, our school will assist as many students as possible to defray cost, if that will be the sole reason why a student/family cannot participate. Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  Through our partnerships with our CBOs (CEI-PEA, and RDRC), we intend to create CCLS-aligned curriculum maps and unit plans that will develop students' learning skills via high leverage engaged learning. Our ELT program will also promote higher student attendance through individualized approach to learning. NYS certified teachers teaching at FDA VI will personalize the learning experience for each student by ensuring that each student's unique learning needs are addressed adequately. Students will have ample opportunities for make-up work. This will serve to further engage and provide hope for those students who may on the verge of giving up. There will be regular outreach to families via Skedula, Blackboard Connect, and regular phone calls. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. 1. Key personnel for the ELT program will include participating teachers, attendance teacher, parent coordinator, and school administration. 2. Community partners will be responsible for those aspects of the ELT that will be collaboratively decided with school administration. For example, SAT preparation and some Regents preparation. 3. The ELT program will be evaluated for its impact on student achievement through regular monitoring and data examination of how participating students are faring relative to non participating ones. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018 – June 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Human resources {teachers, school administration, other school personnel}, books, school supplies, classrooms. ELT will commence after regular school hours and on Saturdays. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The end of January 2019 will be our mid-point benchmark. At this point, we would expect to see: 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  (a) Increased credit accumulation from students who participated in ELT as measured by report cards and transcript updates. (b) Improved scholarship results (c) Improved learning as measured by students being more cognitively engaged in the classroom, improved grades and regents scores. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher assessments and benchmark assessments and regents scores. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.)  PM School for credit and/or enrichment  Tutoring Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group and one-to-one instruction  PM School for credit and/or enrichment  Tutoring Small group and one-to-one instruction  Credit deficiency  Failure during the marking period  Teacher recommendation  Credit deficiency  Failure during the marking period  Teacher recommendation  Credit deficiency  Failure during the marking period  Teacher   PM School for credit and/or enrichment Small group and one-to-one instruction recommendation  Tutoring  Credit deficiency  Failure during the marking period  Teacher recommendation  School records: attendance, academic, etc.  PM School for credit and/or enrichment  Tutoring Small group and one-to-one instruction  Counseling services  Out-of-school Small group and one-to-one English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.)  After school hours from 2:45pm to 5:00pm Some Saturdays Some holidays    After school hours from 2:45pm to 5:00pm Some Saturdays Some holidays    After school hours from 2:45pm to 5:00pm Some Saturdays Some holidays    After school hours from 2:45pm to 5:00pm Some Saturdays Some holidays    Before school hours  During school hours 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.)  School personnel observations referral services counseling and case conferencing  After school hours from 2:45pm to 5:00pm 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 30 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The services that we will provide to our STH population will include those that will ensure that this population, as with all others, progress academically. To this end, some of the services will include providing school supplies, and textbook. We will also provide educational support services such as those described in the AIS section above. This include providing supplemental academic services such as before, during, and after school tutoring. Additional counseling services, and other proven intervention programs will also be offered. There will be outreach through our attendance teacher and teacher teams to help the students/families access school programs. Finally, we will regularly monitor (and revise accordingly} the progress of these services and their impact on the STH population using available school data Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). High quality PD are provided internally by school administration or sometimes externally by high quality partners. Student achievement data (item analysis, teacher observations, etc.,) are used to determine the type of PD to be offered. Participant feedback results are used to gauge the effectiveness of PD workshops. PD will include, but will not be limited to: unpacking the Quality Review Rubric, understanding the Danielson Framework for Teaching, Increasing academic rigor in the classroom, effective unit planning, etc. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable (NA) 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable (NA) 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable (NA) 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Not Applicable (NA) 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 266,243.00 0 11,200.00 0 2,292,342.00 X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, & 6 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 2018-19 SCEP-P 44   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Frederick Douglass Academy VI High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Frederick Douglass Academy VI High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Frederick Douglass Academy VI High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the ESSA is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the ESSA; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 42 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: ELA and Math were identified to improve student literacy skills (reading and writing) language development and reasoning skills within the ESL population. The focus is to enhance their listening, reading and writing skills (based on NYSESLAT scores). These funds will be used to support ELL students (all students including all levels: beginners, intermediate and advanced) assigning a certified ESL Teacher in p.m. school on Mondays and Wednesdays from 3 to 5 p.m. The ESL teacher will "push-in" one hour in ELA and one hour in the Math class. The program will begin on December 10,2014 and continue until June 15, 2015 for a total of 41 sessions. The program will be taught by a certified ESL, Math and ELA teacher. Classroom planning will occur one hour per week per subject at no cost to the program. The program will be structured as follows: 1- students will be divided into two groups of 21 students 2- the ESL teacher will spend one hour in each class every Monday & Wednesday The materials that will be purchased and used with the Title III funds include: duplication services, paper, pens, notebooks and binders. Other materials such as computers, smart boards and ilearn will be provided to the program at no cost. This will permit ESL students immediate understanding of the material removing language questions. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: P.D. for ELL and core teachers will be done by ESL Reading Smart. The program will be purchased using Title III funds. The professional development sessions will take place on alternate Mondays from 7:30 to 8 a.m. The topics to be covered will include: Accelerate English language development, Support WIDA, TESOL, and state ESL learning objectives, Track students’ English language development, Integrate Language Arts and ESL objectives, Integration of reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills. The dates for the program are: 12/22/14, 1/26/15, 2/9/15, 3/9/15, 4/13/15, 5/11/15, 6/8/15. Rationale: the P.D. will give teachers a better understanding of the ESL population; it will provide strategies for teaching ESL students; scaffolding strategies for ELL conceptual understanding. 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Topic 1: SKEDULA/Understanding how to have ELL students reach a proficient level Rationale: explain SKEDULA to ELL and former ELL parents to assure ELL student success by looking at data (grades, attendance, class participation, homework assignments). Date: January 12, 2015 Time 6 - 6:30 p.m. Name of Provider: ELL Teacher Audience: Parents of ELLs and former ELLs Topic 2: Having ELL Parents Understand NYSESLAT Date: March 9, 2015 Time: 6 - 6:30 p.m. Name of Provider: ELL Coordinator Audience: Parents of ELLs and Topic 3: Immigration Date: April 20, 2015 Time: 6- 6:30 p.m. Name of Provider: ELL Coordinator/New York State New Americans Hotline Audience: Parents of ELLs and former ELLs Topic 4: Transcript and graduation requirements Date: May 11, 2015 Time: 6- 6:30 p.m. Name of Provider: Guidance Counselors Audience: Parents of ELLs and former ELLs Sessions will be conducted as part of scheduled PTA Meetings. A separate agenda and sign-in sheet will be provided. There is no cost to the Title III program except for refreshments that will be served. Translators will be provided for parents. 2018-19 SCEP-P 54 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name Frederick Douglass Academy VI High Schoo Borough Queens School Number 260 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Charles Ogundimu, Ph.D. Coach Rosemary Caban ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Colin Dey Teacher/Subject Area Edolla Prince, Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Elaine Lindsey Assistant Principal Evelyn Katz Coach type here School Counselor Rosmond Samuels Parent Parent Coordinator Tonie Roberts Field Support Center Staff Member Marie Rousseau Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 383 2018-19 SCEP-P 56 Total number of ELLs 57 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.88%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and Spanish Lab_R will provide information about the students' English level. This will allow the teacher to scaffold his/her lesson. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate success based on the number of students reaching proficiency levels. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data reveals that many of our newcomers speak no English. Additionally, students who do speak English struggle with reading comprehension and writing with varying levels of proficiency in listening and speaking. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are grouped ungraded and by proficency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? To ensure that the students receive the madated instrucrtional minutes as per part 154, we program the ENL before other classes. Students are programmed according to their proficiency level. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Each content area teacher scaffolds instruction by using ESL strategies that are aligned to the CCLS. In addition to scaffolding they provide native language support by making translation dictionaries and native language glossaries available to the students and they also assign them to groups with students who speak the same language. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Teachers make exams, glossaries and translation dictionaries available in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Vocabulary and grammar are emphasized in each lesson and lessons are differentiated based on the student’s performance levels. After a student tests proficient, they continue to receive modified testing accommodations. As per the subcatagories, instruction is differentiated for ELL as follows: a.) SIFE students – If possible, content is taught in their L1 while the student takes ESL classes. The teacher will inform the students that tutoring is availble for them. Spanish is the predominate language of our students. A large portion of our faculity speaks Spanish and lessons are differentiated accordingly. We also, incorporate interactive activities and questions that the reader comes up with. b.) In all ESL classes, instruction is differentiated. Lessons coinside and foster: speaking, listening, writing, and reading. As per the remaining subgroups, we infuse, “direct instruction with specific reading strategies with interactive lessons” (http://www.p12.nysed.gov/biling/docs/NYSEDSIFEGuidelines.pdf) Long-term ELLs are looked at individually and lessons are tailored to meet their language needs. As per parts c) and d.) The teacher will find out what specific(s) areas of language acquisition the student is having difficulty comprehending. Throughout the year, the teacher will scaffold lessons to incorporate their areas of difficulty into the lesson. e.) In order to assure that former ELLs are proficient in their L2. The ESL teacher will converse with the students content teachers to find out how the student is doing. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teacher of SWDs and ELLs collaborate to plan lessons. Inquiry teams will conduct a school-wide PD plan to help content teachers continue to support ELLs reaching proficiency. The focus will be on the data-driven classroom and differentiation of instruction. Teachers are trained in analyzing data and developing individual learning goals for the students in their classes. Teachers of ELL-SWDs modify materials in classroom by scaffolding text, using graphic organizers. ELLs who still require additional support may also remain in the free-standing ENL class. The teacher will provide the student with work that correlates with their lives outside of acadmia. This will help the student form a connection to the content being taught in their lessons as it is relevant to their life. For example, a lesson being taught to a student who is twenty years old may incorporate life skills such as job applications. While the same content of the lesson can be taught to a ninth grader differentlty. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? These students are programmed first. They look at the IEP to see what their needs are. Examine their NYSESLAT and LABR results to see their English proficiency level, based on their needs. Program the beginners and intermediates during their ELA periods. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs are offered additional tutoring during extended day sessions on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays 2-2:50 pm; additionally they may receive tutoring during their lunch program or during the Saturday Academy. Lunchtime tutoring is offered 11:31-12:15 daily. Students are given a schedule of which teachers (according to C6 assignments) are available for tutoring during these allocated times. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? iLearn, Assistive technolgy - Voice to Text, ENL teacher push-in to ELA classes 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are involved in all programs in the school for example extended day sessions, PSAL, clubs, etc. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Computers; Smart boards; Graphic Organizers; translation dictionaries, and glossaries. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Peer support in their native language; Translation, dictionaries, glossaries, and exams in their native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Peer support in their native language; Translation, dictionaries, glossaries, and exams in their native language. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Computers; Smart boards; Graphic Organizers; translation dictionaries, and glossaries. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parent/Student Orientation 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. The ELL teacher is provided with all mandated training and professional development, as well as professional development that focuses on the writing process. The ESL teacher also serves as out school's Writing Coordinator and works with staff on incorporating supporting writing strategies into their classes, with specific focus on the needs of ELL students. She also leads an inquiry tea. focusing on ELL methodologies. Mandated PD training 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Through inquiry-based work, ELL students are targeted as a focus group and followed within their cohort. All teachers participate in ongoing professional development in the delivery of differentiated instruction. Staff is taught how to identify their ELL students on ARIS and are supported in planning instruction that meets their needs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are encouraged to attend monthly PTA meetings and SLT meetings. In addition, ELL parents are invited to a special reception on Open School Night and Day where they are updated on the services provided to their children and given the opportunity to meet ELL personnel. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The needs of parents are evaluated by meeting regularly with the parent coordinator, who has regular contact with parents and by evaluating data from the school's learning environment survey. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-P 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Charles Ogundimu, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Frederick Douglass Academy VI School DBN: 27Q260 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Charles Ogundimu, Ph.D. Principal Evelyn F. Katz Assistant Principal Tonie Roberts Parent Coordinator Colin Dey ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Edolla Prince, Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Rosmond Samuels School Counselor Michael Prayor Nathifa Morris Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 12/16/15 12/16/15 12/16/15 12/16/15 1/1/01 12/16/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 12/16/15 12/16/15 12/16/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q260 School Name: Frederick Douglass Academy VI HS Superintendent: Elaine Lindsey The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Tonie Roberts Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Begali French 1 1 0.2 0.2 1 1 0.2 0.2 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  Arabic Haitian-Creole Spanish 2 2 127 0.41 0.41 25.87 2 2 127 0.41 0.41 25.87 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name School Calendar Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Freshman Orientation 8/17 How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Blackboard Connect, Letters in Preferred 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  Open-School 9/17, 11/17, 3/18 Languages, Translators 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 SCEP-P 66 
