 29Q265 School Name: EXCELSIOR PREPARATORY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: LILLY LUCAS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information EXCELSIOR PREPARATORY HIGH SCHOOL 342900011265 High School 9-12 143-10 Springfield Blvd, Queens, NY School Number (DBN): 29Q265 718-525-6507 Phone Number: 718-525-6276 Fax: JemandeJames Jjames12@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 29 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Lilly Narine Lucas Nick Rimpici Orin Thomas Lilly Narine Lucas Kevin Standard Tijuan Bootheand SurbhiChopra NA District Information Juan Mendez Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place Flushing, NY jmendez2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 7182817696 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd. Ozone Park, NY 11416 MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 520-6743 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lilly Narine Lucas Nick Rimpici Orin Thomas JemandeJames Christine Hughes Tijuan Boothe SurbhiChopra Kevin Standard Christine Hughes JoanCrawford *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ PTA VP Member/ Parent   Name RonideMichel-Gedeon Shannon Hall Elizabeth Alisme Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? To provide a rigorous, academic, college preparatory experience with an emphasis on the S.T.E.A.M program (science, technology, engineering, arts, and math) while nurturing their social, cultural and athletic skills. All members of our school community are charged with preparing students for life post high school. We believe our students will have the greatest advantage if their social, emotional, critical thinking and problem solving skills are highly developed. In order to align the work around engaging our students with our goals, our mission is to provide our students with a “Rigorous, academic, college preparatory experience with an emphasis on the S.T.E.A.M (Science,   Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics) program while nurturing our students’ social, cultural and athletic skills.” We believe that educating our students in our S.T.E.A.M. program prepares them for life regardless of the profession they choose. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Excelsior Preparatory High School is a small school of about 500 students located in Springfield Gardens section of Queens. Excelsior is one of 12 public schools in New York city that offers access to the Gateway Institute for Pre College Education. Our Gateway population of students receive early access to college readiness through this program in collaboration with city college. Gateway is specifically geared toward preparing students for career in the S.T.E.M fields. The funding that Gateway provides allows students to go on college trips for dramatically reduced prices from the ninth grade. The rigor of the courses that Gateway students are exposed to gives them access to enrichment programs with institutions such as NYU Columbia and Cornell Weill medical center. These students are also able get on the spot admissions to various universities due to how well they are prepared for college with the help of Excelsior Gateway. One challenge we face as a school is that our college and career readiness index shows that while we are graduating some 75% of our students, they are not all college ready. To increase our college and career ready index we have begun to offer regents prep to students who need to retake the algebra and English regents. We are also encouraging newly eligible students to take college now courses. We currently offer free SAT prep to students as an after school program. It is our hope that with the implementation of these programs students will be better for the challenges of college and career. One challenge we face as a school is that our college and career readiness index shows that while we are graduating some 75% of our students, they are not all college ready. To increase our college and career ready index we have begun to offer regents prep to students who need to retake the algebra and English regents. We are also encouraging newly eligible students to take college now courses. We currently offer free SAT prep to students as an after school program. It is our hope that with the implementation of these programs students will be better for the challenges of college and career. To expand our initiatives around preparing students for college and career we have also implemented the LINCT (Lessons In Navigating College Transition) in our Algebra and English classes. LINCT is a college access program whose primary goal is to reduce traditional barriers to enrollment at CUNY by ensuring that students who graduate from NYC public high schools enter college academically eligible to take and succeed in credit-bearing courses. Finally we have expanded our Advance Placement course catalog through the AP for All program and the Computer Science for all program. 0  . 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Males: 251 Students Females: 201 Students Hispanic: 37 Students American Indian or Alaskan Native: 6 students Asian: 11 students Black: 369 students White: 11 students Multiracial: 1 student Ell: 33 students I.E.P: 62 students The majority of our students with disabilities are classified as (LD) learning disabled. The other classifications within our student body include other health impairment, emotional disturbance, and intellectually disabled. Their needs include testing accommodations, (Integrated Cooperative Teaching) the support of two teachers in their core classes, the special class setting (15:1) , related services, etc... 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school received a score of 4.65 for collaborative teachers under the Framework of Supportive Environment. Teachers are encouraged to have leadership roles to implement the vision of the school to improve student achievement. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q265 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 483 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 4 7 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 3 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 68.0% % Attendance Rate 64.0% % Reduced Lunch 5.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 1.4% 8.9% 1.9% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 78% 64% 79.2% 11.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 121 84 86.9% 4.8% 13.9% 81.0% 2.7% 5.6% 4 19% 7.5 N/A N/A 89% 74% 87.4% 18% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Relative to the Framework For Great Schools, our school displays strength in the following areas Rigorous instruction/Collaborative Teachers: Our teachers meet in grade teams and subject teams twice a week. Both teams are charged with analyzing classroom and assessment to improve instruction. Our school instructional team creates and disseminates professional development around critical thinking, question and discussion and writing across the disciplines (Instructional Focus for 2018-2019) Supportive Environment: Teachers are supported by our coaching model and differentiated professional development. We use intervisitations and observation conferences to identify teacher strengths and weakness. We use this data to create support plans for teachers through our observation system called Teachboost. Students our supported through our "kid talk" conferences conducted by our guidance counselors and teachers or through our social work department. Students also have opportunities to join our various student clubs that are designed around student social emotional needs and/or hobbies. This year we have will focus on critical thinking and Literacy after item analysis of our regents data(June 2018) suggested that students had difficultly with exams that required high levels of literacy. We will be using Writing across the curriculum through NYC 9-12 Educating powerful writers. Our subject teams have been charged with creating subject specific instructional strategies around critical thinking and Literacy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 3  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in student performance on exams that require Literacy (English,Global, U.S. History) This goal will be accomplished by using teacher developed subject specific instructional strategies designed to address academic deficiencies . The 10% increase in student performance will be measured by our item analysis tool (I.O. Assessment by Skedula) 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers and Administrators Teachers and Data Administrator Grade Team Leaders, Inquiry Team Leaders and Teachers DIY Subject specific baseline assessments exams will be given to all students on October 30, 2018. All Students October 30, 2018 All Students Nov 1, 2018-Nov 5 , 2018 October 2018-May 2019 Students who did not pass the English, U.S., and Global Exams DIY exams will be graded and student assessment data will be aggregated to discover trends in student performance. Inquiry Team and Grade Team leaders will meet 3 to 4 times a week to: 1) Analyze student assessment data 2) Identify the standards across the subjects that student did poorly in via item analysis 3) Select target population (students in the lowest third who have 85% or higher attendance). The target population may change depending on the findings from our item analysis 4) Develop and implement instructional strategies to address the selected standards 5) Monitor student performance by analyzing student work during grade team meetings and professional development workshops. 6) Administer mid-year exam March 2019 7) Repeat steps 1-4 Administer final assessment by the third week of May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents/guardians are encouraged to attend Parent Teacher Conferences for teachers to share their curriculum and standards of expectations to improve student achievement in collaboration with the school and homes. Teachers and 5  Guidance Counselors also attend PTA Meetings to do presentations to the parents to educate them about the instructional expectations of our school as well as school administrators. Various workshops are held to expose and educate parents of the software Skedula/Pupil Path to monitor their children's academic progress. This year we have also purchased a communications package form I.O. education that allows us to send text messages and large emails to parents. We will use this technology to send parents news letters that educate them about the framework for great schools. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Skedula, I.O. Assessment form I/O Education and Datacation will be used to grade exams, disaggregate and item analyze assessment data. 2. Inquiry team will meet every Monday during 5th period to analyze exam data and create subject specific instructional strategies that address students' deficiencies. 3. Grade Team will meet every Tuesday during 5th period to create and align student tasks to CCLS ,Next Generation Science standards and findings from our inquiry team. 4. Subject team meet every Wednesday during 5th period to create and align student curriculum and unit plans to CCLS ,Next Generation Science standards and findings from our inquiry team Skedula , Baseline Edge and Compass=15,500 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 6  In October 2018 we will administer base line assessments through I.O. assessment. This software will create granular item analysis reports. We will use the results from these assessments to drive instruction. By March 2019 there will be a 10% increase in student performance on exams that require a high level of literacy and critical thinking. These standards would have been Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) School created assessments fashioned after the regents exams. The I.O assessment component of Skedula will grade these exams and measure progress against selected content and skill standards. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our most recent *Quality Review evaluated the school as well developed under indicator 3.4 * School Quality Snapshot reported that overall 69% of our students feel safe, challenged to grow and feel supported to meet high expectations. * 45% of our students felt that teachers notice when they are upset or having emotional difficulty * 73% of our students have 90% attendance. *57.7% average completion rate for remaining regents. Based on these findings we need to integrate structures that promote conversations between students parents and staff that address students social, emotional and academic needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parents will have an increased awareness of the common core curriculum our instructional focus and our initiatives to address social emotional issues as measured by a 5% increase in PTA and parent workshop attendance. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Strategy-School will provide strategic outreach that will maximize increased parent attendance for school and community related events. Parents October 2018-May 2019 Guidance Counselor 1. Activity- guidance counselors will schedule five meetings throughout the school year for parents and caregivers on the common core curriculum partnerships, relationship building between school and family. 2. Activity-guidance counselors will assist parents to complete three self- reflections regarding their knowledge on the common core curriculum. Parents 3. Activity-administration and guidance will schedule at least 6 parent and school meetings for example: Grade Team Meetings, Curriculum Night, Title One Parent meetings, and PTA meetings. In addition, parents of students who are most at risk will be invited to a series of four workshops which will target community Parents 4. Activity-Guidance counselors and school staff will to provide access and resources (Skedula) to be made available to parents on a daily basis to monitor student progress. Parents 5. Activity-Guidance counselors and administration will identify needed areas of improvement and make once weekly continued outreach for parent support (mailings, phone master, Skedula, etc.) to increase parental involvement, with particular attention to students who are high risk. 6. Activity-Social worker and guidance schedule on an as needed daily 3b – Parent and Family Engagement October 2018-May 2019 October 2018-May 2019 Guidance Administrator, Guidance Counselors, Grade Teams October 2018-May 2019 Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Computer Technician How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In addition to having an open door policy which encourages parents to visit and be informed of their children's progress, we encourage them to conference with our social worker or guidance counselors. We have had workshops 9  at PTA Meetings to support parent to child relationships in communicating effectively. Parents and students have attended and shared how they would like to be communicated with. This will start in September and continue throughout the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. School Social Worker and Guidance Counselors 2. Skedula, I.O. Assessment 3. Kid Talk meeting every Friday 5th period 4. Per session is not required for the aforementioned activities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1 . By December 2018, there will be a 2% increase in parent attendance from increased parent outreach. 2. By February 2019, there will be a 3% success rate in parent completion of self-reflections. 3. By February 2019, there will be a 3% increase in parent attendance from increased parent outreach. 4. By June 2019, there will be a 2% increase in 10 grade students who receive a 65 or greater in 4 or more of their classes) 5. By June 2019, there will be a 2% decrease in student suspension rate. 6. By February 2019, all guidance counselors will have completed detailed student profiles on all at-risk students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula will be used to monitor all aforementioned data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Through the continued collaboration of the grade and department team leaders, we have made improving teacher effectiveness a priority goal for this school year. Building off of our ongoing work, we will continue to strengthen teacher practice through enhanced Instructional Rounds and weekly Professional Learning meetings supporting teachers in developing around components 3b, 3c and 3d . Strength- Our teachers created subject specific writing strategies which we are constantly improving upon based on the data from our SIIT team meetings to enhance student reading comprehension. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will participate in ongoing Professional Learning designed to improve teacher pedagogy through aligned curricula and practices that assist them in engaging students in appropriately challenging tasks that demonstrate higher-order thinking skills as evidenced through documented Instructional Rounds and Professional Learning. Teacher teams will engage in analyzing key artifacts such as assessment data, student work and Measure of Teacher Performance data to make adjustments in their teaching practice such that: 1) In 2017-2018 we averaged a 2.64, 2.76 and 2.65 in components 3b, 3c and 3d respectively. By June 2019 we will average a 3 in each of the aforementioned. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We will use observations by administrators and inter-visitation observations conducted by teachers to assess alignment between teacher practice and the aforementioned components of the Danielson Framework. There will be 3 cycles of inter-visitation per semester. In cycle 1, administrators will select components of the Danielson Framework that teachers must use as a lens during their inter-visitation. This component was selected because it was deemed the component that the particular teacher needed the most support in. In cycle 2, teachers are to visit a class outside of their discipline. In cycle 3, teachers are allowed to visit any teacher they want. Teachers Teachers Composite low inference observation data from administrator observations and teacher visits will be used to share best practices . Teachers November 2018-May 2019 Cycle 1 November 2018 Cycle 2 February 2019 Cycle 3 May 2019 November 2018-May 2019 Assistant Principals Principal and Assistant Principals Grade Team and Inquiry Team Leaders and assistant principals. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers are mandated to maintain ongoing communication with families to inform them of their children's progress academically. Our social worker updates parents on social emotional behaviors that may or may not impede on students' academic achievement. Teachers also attend some PTA Meetings to interact with parents and students who are present to provide updates academically or clarify mandated curriculum requirements.This year (September 2017) we purchased a communications package through I.O. education that will improve our efforts to communicate with parents. In November 2017 we will distribute our bi-weekly news letter electronically. We will use this method to support families understanding of the Framework for Great Schools. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2  We will use Teachboost to monitor our teacher observation. All teacher will observed in observation cycles that last approximately two weeks. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will look for effective to highly effective ratings under each component in Advance’s Teacher Level MOTP Detail report at the end of each observation cycle. We will also look for best practices from the findings of the teacher inter-visitation observations to see whether they are being implemented with fidelity in our classrooms. We have created observation cycles that are 2 weeks long and allows us to focus on one component at a time. Our observation cycles started on October 17 2018. By May 2019 95% of our teachers will be effective to highly effective in domain 3 of the Danielson Framework Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use Teachboost to monitor our teacher observation cycles. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to improve student achievement Excelsior Preparatory High School has implemented the following initiatives and/or put in place the following structures. Rigorous Instruction- Our Subjects Teams/Grade Teams develop subject specific instructional strategies that increase rigor in the classrooms via critical thinking and writing. These teams are also charged with aligning curricula to improve accessibility and participation in advance placement classes. Our June 2018 regents data suggested that students had difficulty with constructed response which requires critical thinking and writing. As a response we have created a professional development workshop that trains our teachers how to design lessons and performance tasks to enhance critical thinking. These workshops will be conducted every Monday starting September 2018. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administration would have developed and implemented a differentiated professional calendar informed by teachers as evidenced by a professional development log housed in Google drive. 90% of teachers will have engaged in professional development workshops by choice. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 5th period Monday through Friday will be dedicated to common planning time and professional development. This time will be used for Sped Co-planning,Grade Team Meetings,Subject team meetings,A.I.S.,Pupil Personnel Meetings and our School Instructional Improvement Team. These teams will meet to collaborate, plan, implement, monitor and adjust initiatives th support all learners (i.e. SWD's, ELL's etc.) ● 5 th period, Monday through Friday, will be dedicated to common planning time and professional development. Teachers will engage in a differentiated professional development calendar informed by their feedback from last year. Sessions are designed to build capacity and support teachers. ● Differentiated professional development calendar disseminated ● Professional Development log created, updated and monitored. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers October 2018-June 2019 Grade Team Leaders, Inquiry Team Leaders Teachers and Assistant Principals All Teachers and All Students October 2018-June 2019 All Teams and Administration All teachers October 2019 All Teachers October 2018-June 2019 S.I.I.T team and administration Computer Tech, Data Administrator and Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administrators are always present at the PTA Meetings or SLT Meetings to inform the families. Communication is also sent home by snail mail, email, phonemaster and Skedula to keep parents/guardians updated. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Common Planning time is implemented in teacher schedules (No Cost Associated) 5  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By February 2019 administration will review our professional development log to evaluate success and/or adjust our action plan around professional development. Success Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We currently use Google docs and Apps to archive and distribute student work for review and monitoring. Google Docs allows teachers to store student work via Google Classroom and Google drive. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our most recent QR 83% of our community responded positively to questions about strong family and community ties. We believe we received this evaluation because we have structures in place to enrich the civic life of the school. For the second year in a row we have a community assistant who creates and distributes a family newsletter to communicate events, news and expectations to families. We also conduct parent-child communication workshops through our PTA twice a year. Our guidance staff conducts workshops throughout the year in college and career topics. Yearly family events include Winter Ball, International Night and Spring Concert. Our teachers regularly contact parents about student progress. Finally, Skedula technology is available to parents to check student progress and contact staff. Although the aforementioned initiatives have been successful we have had some challenges: 1) Overall attendance to parent teacher conferences and school events are relatively low. 2) Some parents are still not using the technology to access students' progress consistently Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will show a 3% increase in Strong Family and Community Ties. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Grade Assemblies- ● Guidance team meets with each grade weekly during an advisory period. ● Conduct grade specific workshops to provide college information related to college and career readiness. ● Used to communicate academic and behavioral expectations throughout the school year. Advisories ● Students meet with their adviser once a month to discuss social and emotional issues, character building, conflict resolution, grades, current events and topics related to college and career readiness. Plans for Success ● Teacher generated reports that target student who are failing their classes two weeks before the end of each marketing period. This plan contains the following information: Possible reasons for student failure Outreach made to parent and student Specific areas of the curriculum/standards that the student hasn’t mastered An action plan for student success ● Increased frequency and convenience of parent workshops on Skedula. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9 th , 10 th ,11 th 12 th grades September 2018-June 2019 Guidance Counselors All Students September 2018- June 2019 Advisors and Admin Teachers and Admin All students who are in danger of failing halfway into the marking period Two weeks before the marking period ends. Two plans for success for each failing student per semester Parents and students October 2018-June 2019 Administration, Guidance and Technology Specialists 8  "Kid Talk Fridays"-Conducted by guidance and administration to increase the number of parent teacher conferences. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session for after school events (TBA based on budget) Google Doc to create parent surveys (Google Apps For Education cost is free) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored through the use of Skedula, attendance, at PTC and PTA meetings, signed and returned Skedula progress reports before the end of each marking period. Students and parents will receive survey via skedula and Google drive to gauge our progress for this goal. this survey will be conducted in February 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use google docs to to monitor our progress Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 30 students will receive writing and reading skills reinforcement; Regents preparation, Targeted intervention for students who have 75% attendance but few credits; homework review, study skills, project assistance and make-up assignments. 20 students will receive remediation in math skills; calculator use, study skills, make-up assignments and Regents preparation. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Remediation, Regents Prep, Writing workshops, PLATO Small group instruction, one to one tutoring; peer tutoring Remediation, Regents Prep, Writing workshops, PLATO Small group instruction, one to one tutoring; peer tutoring Science 21 students receive remediation in science lessons; study skills; make-up assignments; Regents preparation Remediation, Regents Prep, Writing workshops, PLATO Small group instruction, one to one tutoring; peer tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After school one day a week from 2:30-3:07 pm Small Group Instruction 5 th period three times a week Small Group instruction Saturdays 9:00 a.m. 1:00 p.m. After school one day a week from 2:30-3:07 pm Small Group Instruction 5 th period three times a week Small Group instruction Saturdays 9:00 a.m. 1:00 p.m. After school one day a week from 2:30-3:07 pm Small Group Instruction 5 th period three times a week 0  Social Studies 28 students receive remediation in Social Studies lessons; study skills; make-up assignments; Regents preparation. Remediation, Regents Prep, Writing workshops, PLATO Small group instruction, one to one tutoring; peer tutoring Remediation, Regents Prep, Writing workshops, PLATO Small group instruction, one to one tutoring; peer tutoring At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 70 students receive pull out intervention services in group or one on one during the AIS time if their schedule does not allow during the day or if they need additional intervention Small Group instruction Saturdays 9:00 a.m. 1:00 p.m. After school one day a week from 2:30-3:07 pm Small Group Instruction 5 th period three times a week Small Group instruction Saturdays 9:00 a.m. 1:00 p.m. After school one day a week from 2:30-3:07 pm Small Group Instruction 5 th period three times a week Small Group instruction Saturdays 9:00 a.m. 1:00 p.m. 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 6 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 1. Social Emotional support through counseling. 2. Supplies: Notebooks, Bookbags etc Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We currently have 6 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2 We have provided them with various toiletries and school supplies. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $1,000 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Administrative staff regularly attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly qualified teachers. ● Collect resumes of highly qualified teachers ● The secretary will work closely with the network HR point person to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines ● Mentors are assigned to support struggling and unqualified teachers ● A Team is chosen to review candidates resumes and interview the candidates on a panel ● After the team has selected a few candidates, candidates meet with the principal for the next level of interview ● A Lesson Plan must be provided for a demonstration lesson in the subject area ● The demo lesson is observed by administration and a teacher in the content area ● The teacher ‘s performance is discussed and a decision is made to hire or not ● References are requested from previous supervisors ● A copy of satisfactory ratings must be provided ● A copy of portfolio or lesson plans must be provided for reference 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 4  ● Mentors are assigned to support struggling and unqualified teachers ● Teachers will receive professional development and department support on ICT and differentiation best practices and strategies ● ELL teachers will be scheduled to collaborate with Gen Ed teachers for improved student achievement ● Teachers College providing professional development aligned to ELA Common Core State Standards ● Network to provide ongoing support for teacher team meetings with projects and developing subject wide assessments that align to the Common Core State Standards. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Principal and School Instructional Improvement Team are responsible for creating and administering our DIY assessments. We will be conducting professional development workshops in: 5  1) Creating authentic performance tasks 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 233,369.00 0 0 4371.00 3,113,418.00 X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 6   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. [Excelsior Preparatory High School] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, ESSA, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [Excelsior Preparatory High School] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 8  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 9  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) [Excelsior Preparatory High School] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, ESSA, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 0  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by ESSA; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 1  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 3  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name Excelsior Preparatory High school Borough Queens School Number 265 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lilly Narine Lucas Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jacqueline Smartt Teacher/Subject Area Janelle Cannonier/ESL Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Nycole Sheffield Superintendent Elaine Lindsey Assistant Principal Hassan Fuller & Rodney Orji Coach NA School Counselor K. Carter & L. Johnson Parent Sue Burgher Parent Coordinator NA Field Support Center Staff Member Marie Rousseau Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 487 5 Total number of ELLs 27 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.54%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tool used to assess early literacy skills will be based on the NYSESLAT Modality Analysis which will determine areas of weakness, which will then determine materials and strategies that can be used to differentiate instruction and improve literacy skills. In conjunction with the NYSESLAT, ELL periodic assessments, NYSITELL, RNMR Modality and MOSL performance assessments are reviewed. In addition, students are administered the Bader Reading and Language Inventory to determine their fluency, comprehension, and phonemic awareness to assist in further instruction to target core issues. This data is aligned to the school's instructional focus by allowing the ELL teacher to target core writing with the students based on their overall reading ability. Upon data analysis, showed that there has been improvement in the academic performance of ELLs, but more importantly allows for specific interventions that could be employed for the individual student. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 6  The ESL teacher coordinates with our ESL coordinator/ Programmer via our SIIT team meetings to discuss student achievement. The ESL teachers also meets with our support team to discuss mandates. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the ELL program will be evaluated through the NYSESLAT results, successful credit accumulation as an indicator of classes passed and advancement to the next grade level, Regents examinations passed and graduation rate. In addition, ELLs are further evaluated based on class-work assignments, tests, ongoing formative assessments, and student self-evaluations and assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ESL teacher coordinates/ disseminates the data with our Programmer/ ESL coordinator . 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] NA 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. ELL students' proficiency levels varied. There were beginners, intermediate, and advanced level students based on the various evaluations administered. It was also noted that there were writing deficiencies that were present not only with the ELL population, but school-wide. There has been a decrease noted in many of the students with respect to writing, which is in part why the school's current instructional focus is on writing. Many students showed improvements moving from entering to emerging and transitioning or transitioning to expanding with few students moving to commanding, and many students progressed over modalities and grade level.. Students who take the NYSITELL exam are placed at entering or commanding. 2014-2015 school year, there was a total of 25 ELL students: 8% beginners, 28% intermediate, 28% advance,and 4% proficient and 32% new admits. 2015-2016 school year, we now have a total of 21 active ELL students: 5% entering, 19% emerging, 33% transitioning, and 43% expanding. 7 students in the 2015-2016 school year have met commanding status. 2016-2017 school year we had a total of 14 active ELL students: 28% emerging, 42% transitioning and 28% expanding. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The NYSITELL data is reviewed with the programmer/ELL coordinator. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All ELLs are programmed for the mandated units of ESL. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels receive instructions together via the stand alone model with the ESL teacher. Students at the transitional, expanding and commanding level are scheduled for one period of integrated ENL through ELA. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. 7  NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are programmed according to classes for mandated periods: Entering and Emerging have 3 classes per day each week; transitioning have 2 classes per day each per week; expanding and commanding have 1 ESL class per day each week and 1 ELA class per day each week. Students are programmed based on their level of proficiency performance as indicated on the RLAT report as measured by the NYSESLAT 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All content areas are taught in English, however teachers differentiate instruction to accommodate ELL students. Dictionaries, glossaries, and specific vocabulary for subject areas are also used, and scaffolding techniques. The ESL teacher and the content area teachers meet to discuss students' progress and to assist with techniques of how to work with ELL students. Teachers are also encouraged to participate in workshops and professional development related to quality teaching for English Language Learners. Content areas deliver instruction following the standards for ELL, ELA and the Standards for specific content areas. This is accomplished through the use of a differentiated instructional framework that includes explicit instruction, careful modeling, coaching, scaffolding, group discussion, problem solving, cooperative learning groups, flexible grouping as well as ensuring that students practice opportunities and expectations for independent applications to help student meet and/or exceed NYS and city standards. Leveled reading materials , manipulatives, graphic organizers, non-verbal and context clues are utilized to provide meaning for instruction and to promote success 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? By evaluating foreign transcripts, by administering the NYSITELL, and by utilizing Teachers with the same native language for translation services and academic support. Additionally the Spanish LAb is administered to new Spanish Speaking students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A SIFE students will attend one-on-one tutoring, read aloud activities, phonemic awareness instruction, fluency, spelling, guided reading and writing, modeled writing, shared writing, audio books-listening, pronunciation and reading, visual opportunities through technology and film and the use of manipulatives. The use of the native language will be an integral part of the academic intervention. b. The school will give Newcomers many opportunities to read and write in meaningful contexts, in their first and second languages. Draw on effective strategies for increasing literacy skills in their native language, that will promote English language acquisition. Draw on their background experiences and encourage connections between academic concepts and students' cultural background. Help students see the value of being able to communicate in multiple languages. Connect with students' families and culture. Incorporate culture and native language, introduce multicultural literature, and draw on the expertise on community members. Give ELL students opportunities to teach others about their first language and home culture. Use effective strategies such as project-based learning, thematic instruction, and cooperative grouping to engage all learners. Give students opportunities to talk about shared learning experiences. Hands-on experiential learning experiences will develop understanding. Help ELL students connect words with meaning by using nonverbal clues and non-linguistic representation of ideas, including multimedia, manipulatives, simulations and modeling. Vary assessment strategies. Use wide-ranging assessments, including observations, portfolios, and performance assessments. 8  c. ELL students have additional after-school help, one-to-one tutoring, and lunch time readings with a teacher or a peer buddy. Students also have the opportunity to participate in extended day activities such as after-school, Regents preparation and tutorial sessions. This will help them to further acquire the skills and subject content needed to pass the Regents examinations. Students and parents participate in individual and group counseling to keep both students and parents abreast of their academic progress as well as graduation requirements. Our instructional program will place additional emphasis on the writing, reading, and listening component. We will establish a successful reading and writing program by implementing the following practices: -Conducting explicit instruction of skill. Students will write often and use their peers in the classroom as their audience. Students will work with partners to plan, write, and edit and provide ongoing feedback with one another. By examining each other's feedback and work, students will have ongoing opportunities to learn new words, and understand the mechanics of writing. -Setting classroom protocols. The focus will be on the protocols of writing. Activities will include the understanding of the writing process, rules, and routines of writing and reading comprehension. Students will be taught what to do during the editing stages and conference with one another. Dictionaries and glossaries, and highlighter will be used to facilitate the process. The teachers will manage time within the diverse writing activities but also incorporating writing across the curriculum. There will also be a computer workstation with directions for accessing direct instruction on all the protocols and skills programs, the Internet and word processing programs. -Set high standards for writing. Although we implement all the learning standards in our ELL classes, we also need to challenge every child with an enriched curriculum, which includes direct instruction on all the protocols and skills needed to be a successful writer. d. Long-term ELLs will work with content area teachers, especially ELA teachers. They will work with vocabulary development, reading comprehension and techniques for completing multiple choice questions. In addition, students will work with Guidance Counselor in class placement; meet with students to discuss progress; provide support where necessary to advance within college and career readiness and master skills needed to graduate, enroll in college, and have a productive career. e. All ELLs that have reached commanding levels for up to 2yrs received .5 unit of integrated ENL through ELA. They also receive all ELls testing accommodation in addition to counseling. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instruction and grade level materials teachers use that both provide academic content areas and accelerate English language development include: Jigsaw reading techniques, Round Robin, Think-Pair-Share, double-entry journals, differentiated instruction, scaffolding appropriate text level readers, and the use of native language materials. The ENL teacher provide the mandated unit of instruction and differentiate the delivery according to student's IEP. Currently we do not have any ELL_SWD that requires bilingual placement. However, should we enroll such student, a language Para will be provided. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment includes weekday after-school programs . Students who are ELL-SWD are enrolled in ICT classes. The lessons are re-differentiated to meet the individual needs of students. The instructional strategies include cooperative learning, role-playing, the use of modeling, graphic organizers and visuals, concept mapping, vocabulary and language development, guided interactions, scaffolding and the use of computer assisted instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 9  Targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other content areas include after-school programs, small groups according to individual weaknesses. ELLs meet with content area teachers for individual tutoring: ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science teachers. The use of the native language is reinforced during these interventions in the form of glossaries, bilingual dictionaries and peer-tutoring. The content areas teachers that speak the students' language also provide additional support. Students are selected based on their progress and report-card data. ELL students participate in the After-School tutorials and extended day Saturday Regents review and preparation programs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The school will continue to improve the delivery of instruction to support the ELL's in their current content classes so that they will meet and exceed the benchmarks for the Common Core standards. The data gathered from the benchmark assessments will allow for us to continue Tier One interventions within daily class instruction. Excelsior will be implementing the use of Achieve 3000 during this academic year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The Liberty Partnership Program college bound program at St. John's University on Saturdays. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students in our school are encouraged to participate in all school programs including sports, clubs, and shows. ELL students are exposed to school-wide advertisements for all programs. ELL students are encouraged to participate in all school activities. Funding sources for extra-curricular school activities include school per-session budget for staff members. All after-school activities such as clubs, tutoring, sports, and begin at 2:30 p.m. until 4:00 p.m on Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays . 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Audio book program entitled "Read 180" is used to assist students in their developing reading skills. This is very suitable for sub-groups since students can work in small groups assisted by the use of the audio system. Works of literature are enforced with the use of video produced materials such as "A Miracle Worker," and "A Raisin in the Sun" in text and in video. Teachers of content area use SMART boards, overhead projectors, and power point presentations, as well as glossaries and specific vocabulary to support ELL students. Bilingual glossaries, bilingual dictionaries , buddy system are used as native language support during content instruction. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The native language support is given through the buddy system where senior ELL students assist incoming ELL students. Encouragement is also given to ELL students by staff members who are native language speakers in other content areas. These are in addition to bilingual glossaries, bilingual dictionaries , buddy system are used as native language support during content instruction. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELL students are placed in grade levels based on the number of credits earned. Grade and age levels are determined as per the evaluation of foreign transcripts. Required services, support, and resources will be identified as per the needs of each individual ELL student. If necessary, students will be directed to the resource center and other one-on-one tutoring. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Audio book program entitled "Read 180" is used to assist students in their developing reading skills. This is very suitable for sub-groups since students can work in small groups assisted by the use of the audio system. Works of literature are enforced with the use of video produced materials such as "A Miracle Worker," and "A Raisin in the Sun" in text and in video. Teachers of content area use SMART boards, overhead projectors, and power point presentations, as well as glossaries and specific vocabulary to support ELL students. Bilingual glossaries, bilingual dictionaries , buddy system are used as native language support during content instruction. 0  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Activities for new incomming students include orientation where students will receive information in native language such as important areas in the school building, clubs where students can be assigned to a buddy, and peer tutoring using native language as well as English. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At Excelsior, the professional development supports the school instructional focus which is Writing across the disciplines using academic vocabulary, reading comprehension and evidence to support claims, generate hypotheses, pose arguments and solve real world problems. Excelsior staff, ( Principal, AP's , all content area teachers, the special education teachers, ESL teacher, guidance counselors, para professionals, social worker, and secretaries). They all participate in ongoing, long term targeted professional development with strong emphasis on Vocabulary acquisition, Writing across the disciplines and reading comprehension strategies. Reinforcement of Danielson Framework is also emphasized to ensure high quality of lesson delivery to yield student achievement. In addition teachers from all content areas meet once a week to work on the school inquiry focus targeting low performing students. The targeted population are mainly Ells and English speaking students from the Caribbean. Both subgroups display SIFE like characteristics with low literacy skills. As such Excelsior is implementing Achieve 3000 and will receive intensive professional development from the vendor. All teachers at Excelsior are teachers of ELLS. Professional development is offered in argumentative writing, using counterclaims, using evidence, vocabulary acquisition and questioning techniques. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Through our advisory curriculum, the staff is provided with materials that integrate all students into discussions and assimilation of the school culture. Professional development is provided every Monday as per Chancellor's Regulations. Meeting agendas and minutes are archived electronically through Google docs. 1  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of ELLS are scheduled for a conference with the Guidance Counselor, the Ell teacher and content area teachers to discuss student progress once a year. If a student is failing more than 2 classes in a marking period, failure notices are sent to the parent in their preferred language and parents are recommended to attend a conference to create a plan of action for the student. At this meeting parents are provided with their child's transcript to discuss the child advancement toward credit accumulations, Regents exams needed and graduation. During this meeting translators are available if needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are involved in Saturday workshops where they are given information about the New York City Secondary Education policies for attendance, graduation, and discipline. Parents are also invited to participate in festive activities such as International dinner night, concerts, talent shows that takes place after-school activities . In addition, parents are invited to attend financial aid night, curriculum night and college application process. Letters of invitations to all functions are provided in English and in the parent preferred language. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lilly Lucas, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Excelsior Preparatory High Sch School DBN: 29Q265 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Lilly Narine Lucas Title Principal Hassan Fuller Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Jacqueline Smartt ENL/Bilingual Teacher Sue Burgher Parent Janelle Cannonier Teacher/Subject Area Dimian McKenzie Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Katrina Carter School Counselor Elaine Lindsey Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/8/15 09/08/15 9/8/15 09/08/15 9/8/15 9/8/15 9/8/15 9/8/15 9/8/15 4 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Excelsior Preparatory High School Superintendent: Elaine Lindsey DBN: 29Q265 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Ronide Ronide Michel-Gedeon Michel-Gedeon Teacher Teacher Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We collect language preference information and other pertinent data during our intake interview process.The Home Language Identification Survey is explained and is given to the parents to be completed. Assistance is offered as needed. When the parent returns the blue card, the preferred language of communication is checked and parents who express that the method of communication is other than English, the pupil accounting secretary makes a note of it in ATS and when the phone messenger sends out notices, it is translated for the parents when applicable. 5  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Croatian French GA Gujarati English Spanish Hindi Urdu Haitian/Creole French 2 1 2 8 1 2 544 21 1 1 18 8 .33 .17 .33 1.3 .17 .33 91 3.49 .17 .17 3 1.3 2 1 2 5 1 2 543 22 1 0 22 5 .33 .17 .33 .83 .17 .33 90 4 .17 0 3.6 .83 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. There are no languages that represent 10%. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Ongoing Ongoing Ongoing Ongoing Parent Teacher conference announcements Military opt-out letter Condom distribution letter Failure notice Regents exam notifications Google Translate Google Translate Google Translate Google Translate 6  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parents-Teacher Conferences ( November and March) Ongoing Curriculum Night September Ongoing Guidance meeting (at the end of Marking period 3 for the first semester in January and Marking period 4& 5 for the second semester.) Ongoing Student Success Meetings Ongoing interpretation service(s)? We will utilize our staff members to assist with translation. We will utilize our staff members to assist with translation. We will utilize our staff members to assist with translation. We will utilize our staff members to assist with translation. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We will utilize the staff members who speak the specific languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. This regulation will be given to all staff members in the beginning of the school year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) When parents/guardians enter the school, they will be asked if they need the necessary information in another language. 7  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent survey will be distributed and collected at the end of events on a periodic basis to asses the the quality of available services. 8 
