 29Q268 School Name: PS/IS 268 Principal: LISSA GRANT-STEWART   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS/IS 268Q 342900010216 K through 8 School Number (DBN): 29Q268 92-07 175 th Street, Jamaica, NY 11433 718-206-3240 718-206-2938 Phone Number: Fax: Lissa Grant Stewart lgrants@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Lissa Grant Stewart Lisa Merle DulcyRosenthal Gloria Nelson None MezuOfoegbu District Information Geographical District: 29 Superintendent’s Office Address: Beverly Mitchell Superintendent: 222-14 Jamaica Ave. , Queens Village NY, 11428 Bmitche2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 264-3146 Phone Number: 718 264-3148 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd., Queens NY 11416 Mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917 520-67643 Phone Number: 718 348-2997 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lissa Grant Stewart Melody Davis DulceyRosenthal Theresa Stanley MezuOfoegbu Nydia Cordoba Ian Charles MoniraKhandaker *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent   Gloria Nelson Daryl LaCorte Tamara FilsAime Liza Raymond OluwafemiMayungbo Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: We believe that PS/IS 268 should employ a respectful, cooperative and nurturing environment that will mold our diverse population, in order to create self-motivated, caring and successful citizens. We pledge to foster independent, resourceful students, with teachers and staff who will promote academic success on multiple levels by: collaborating, sharing values, showing integrity, showing respect, displaying a zest for knowledge, communicating effectively, and displaying confidence.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/IS 268Q, located in Jamaica, Queens, is a K through 8 school, with a diverse population of approximately 603 students. We opened in 2003 as a random selection school to serve students throughout District 29. Our school facilitates two or three classes on each grade level, not inclusive of self-contained and integrated co-teaching classes. The average attendance rate for students was 94% and for teachers, 95%. Our population consists of 25.9% Asian, 31 % Black, 31.3% Hispanic, 9.0% American Indian or Alaskan Native and 2..2% White, 0.7% Multi-Racial. We pride ourselves in being able to nurture students from early childhood to adolescence. We strive to educate the whole child: academically, socially, emotionally, and physically. Our academic program is integrated with a fine arts program consisting of music, art, dance and drama. Our school participates in the Arts Engage Initiative which provides our community with an opportunity to enrich arts and academic teaching and learning. We partner with CUNY Creative Arts Project to provide Drama to grades 3-5. We have a partnership with Urban Advantage and Learning Gardens which gives our students the opportunity to learn through a project-based inquiry approach and visit cultural institutions that enhance their STEAM education. We also partner with Foodbank for New York City to offer students in grade K-2 an opportunity to learn about living a healthy lifestyle through the Cookshop program. Students also learn to lead healthy lifestyles by participating in our BOKs and CHAMPS programs. We offer swimming lessons for our second graders through the Swim For Life Program at the YMCA. We also offer a STEM program through NYU that offers our middle school students an opportunity to engage in engineering, science and technology. The Middle School partners with the YWCA as part of the new SONYC initiative. The purpose of this after-school program is to provide STEAM and recreational opportunities to our students. The program includes robotics, film making, journalism, fencing, rugby, step, dance, and basketball. The staff and students are engaged in the Academic and Personal Behavior Pilot Program which helps us explore strategies to foster a growth mindset in students. We are part of the Rising New York Road Runners, NYRR’s youth program and events platform, is built to develop movement skills in kids through a mix of running and fitness activities. The program is designed to help kids build their confidence, their motivation, and their desire to be physically active for life. We are proud of our involvement with the local Queens library, we make seasonal visits with our students and encourage students and families to read. PS/IS 268 is a 'College Access for All' school that provides early college awareness, support, and resources for our middle school students. Our school curriculum and instruction are aligned to the Common Core State Standards, NYS Social Studies, and Next Generation Science Standards. We utilize several pedagogical practices school wide which provide opportunities for students to participate and engage in critical thinking and learning. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our student population includes 14% Students with Disabilities and 16% English as a New Language. Our needs include modifying instruction to meet the needs of our growing ENL and Special Education populations in an effort to close the gap between the achievement levels of our general and special education populations. We translate verbal and written communication to parents into the high incidence languages. We offer a push-in/pull-out ENL program and a Title 3 after-school program to further support language development. This school year we will implement an adult ENL class to assist families and continue to open our school library to parents. Our teachers employ a multi-modality approach to instruction to address individual needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  This year, our school has realized the most progress in the area of Parent Engagement. Presently we have hosted Hispanic Heritage Night. To further cultivate a stronger school community, we will continue to host a Family Bingo Night and a Multicultural Extravaganza. The strategies we will put in place this year will include hosting Family Engagement Nights such as Arts Night, STEM Night, and Bed, Books, and Beyond, to familiarize the parents with the curriculum, engage students and parents in activities to strengthen skills, celebrate learning and build community. . 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q268 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 632 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 40 43 27 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 16 14 27 25 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 78.0% % Attendance Rate 72.9% % Reduced Lunch 16.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 8.5% 32.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.06 2% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 47.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 91% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged YES YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS YES YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 39 36 93.4% 5.4% 13.9% 28.5% 27.8% 9.3% 2 7% 9.3 35.4% 63% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A YES YES NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The performance level of general education students exceeds the performance level of Special Education students and English Language Learners (ELL). The analysis of General Education students in grades 3-8 shows that of the 383 students who participated in the New York State English Language Arts Assessment, 16% of students achieved level 1; 37% of students achieved level 2; and 47% students achieved level 3 and 4. Out of the 350 students who participated in the New York State Math Assessment, 29% of students achieved level 1; 35% of students achieved level 2; and 35% of students achieved level 3 and 4. The performance level of students with disabilities decreased by 1%.. The proficiency level of ENL students went from 31% to 37%. The analysis of Special Education students in grades 3-8 shows that of the 56 students who participated in the New York State English Language Arts Assessment, 52% of students achieved level 1; 36% of students achieved level 2; and 13% of students achieved level 3 and 4. Out of the 54 students that participated in the New York State Math Assessment, 74% of students achieved level 1; 15% of students achieved level 2; and 11% of students achieved level 3 and 4. The analysis of ELL students in grades 3-8 shows that of the 20 students who participated in the New York English Language Arts Assessment, 55% of students achieved level 1; 35% of students achieved level 2. 10% of students achieved level 3. In the New York State Math Assessment, 55% of students achieved level 1; 30% achieved level 2; and 15% of students achieved level 3 and 4. The Quality Review (QR) indicated that an area of celebration is ensuring engaging, rigorous and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and content standards. The Quality Review findings recommend that we align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal 3  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will decrease the achievement gap between General Education students and Special Education/ENL students by 5% as measured by their performance on the determined local measures, by modifying curriculum and targeting instructional practices to meet individual needs, 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will develop instructional strategies to support language development by participating in lab-sites, inter-class visitations, professional learning sessions (e.g. 3 T Framework Model) to engage students in science and social studies as well as further develop conceptual understanding and increase/extend vocabulary, book clubs, etc. K-5 English Language Learner students will participate in a Title III after-school language development program. Teachers will incorporate the use of the Fundations reading program to build foundational skills in reading as a supplement to the Ready Gen Curriculum. Teachers will collaborate with their colleagues and participate in planning sessions and peer inter-visitations. K-2 Teachers will participate in the Universal Literacy Initiative in which the k-2 teachers will have a literacy coach to support student achievement. The goal is to have all students reading by the second grade. Teachers will participate in professional development with a focus on increasing rigor. Teachers will develop strategies to differentiate instruction, increase their understanding of the Depth of Knowledge, the Instructional Shifts, and Common Core Learning Standards, NYS Social Studies, Amplify Learning Science Program and Next Generation Science Standards. Teachers will revise the curriculum maps to incorporate a more comprehensive approach to literacy. This includes Guided reading strategies to increase students' reading levels; a grammar program to improve writing skills; modifying the approach to writing by incorporating strategies from the writer's workshop. K-8 K-8 Sept. through June Administration, Teachers, ENL Teachers, Speech teachers. Paras Sept. through November Administration, Teachers, ENL Teachers, Speech teachers. Paras Sept. through June Administration, Teachers, ENL Teachers, Speech teachers. Paras Sept. through June Administration, Teachers, ENL Teachers, Speech teachers. Paras 5  Teacher will utilize the Rewards Reading comprehension program and Imagine Learning to support the English Language Learners. Parents will engage in curriculum night, parent workshops, literacy events, family game night, and open houses to be informed about the curriculum and learn how to support their child at home. Teachers share instructional strategies and activities to reinforce skills. All written correspondence is translated and interpreters are provided at all workshops and events. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement K-8 Sept. through June Administration, Teachers, ENL Teachers, Speech teachers. Paras How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will engage in curriculum night, parent workshops, literacy events, family game night, and open houses to be informed about the curriculum and learn how to support their child at home. Teachers share instructional strategies and activities to reinforce skills. All written correspondence is translated and interpreters are provided at all workshops and events. Parents will also be invited to participate in Open School Week where they will have an opportunity to visit their child's class and learn about the instructional approaches and curriculum. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Imagination Learning Programs Professional Literature for book club studies Per Session and Per Diem Funds for professional learning sessions Professional learning around STEAM education, Fundations Program, Differentiation, ENL strategies i-Ready Program Title III After-school Enrichment Program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 6  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, students will demonstrate progress towards achieving grade level standards as measured by a 5% increase of students scoring on grade level on the midpoint I-Ready checkpoint. Teachers will use an assessment that is aligned with the I-Ready and NYS Assessments to conduct a mid-point check-in that will determine student progress towards meeting the standards. Administrators and teachers will monitor how strategies are being used through observations and inter-visitations. Feedback will be given by colleagues and Administrators. The following Mid-Point Benchmarks will be utilized to assess progress:  ELA I-Ready: goal of 2.5% increase of students on grade level.  MATH I-Ready: goal of 2.5% increase of students on grade level. Teachers will reflect on their practices by using data from the check-in assessment to analyze the effectiveness of their practice as determined by the progress of their students. Teachers will make adjustments in instruction based on this data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Beginning and End of year I-Ready diagnostic and Mid-point check-in. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on our state test results, our students have shown academic progress due to the increased rigor in instruction and curriculum. To continue an upward trajectory of academic success and further development of the whole child, we are increasing our focus on social and emotional learning which continue to promote a positive school culture and improved school climate.. We currently are implementing Positive Behavior Intervention Strategies (PBIS) Character Development Instruction (CDI) as well as Restorative Circle Professional Development for certification. As stated in the 2017-18 School Survey data our school was deemed proficient in establishing a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provides support for those expectations. Based on the last school survey: 63% of our students respond that they feel challenged; 58% of our students say that their teachers ask difficult questions; 87% perceived that their teachers want them to be better thinkers; 88% feel safe in the school building; 89% feel that teachers give specific suggestions to improve their work and explain things in different ways to enhance their understanding. We would like to appropriately challenge students and provide them with the supports to meet these challenges. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our goal is to appropriately challenge students and provide them with the support to meet their challenges. By June 2019 students will become more independent learners and active participants in their learning. and acquire the necessary skills for academic, social and emotional success as measured by an increase in their performance on summative and formative assessments . 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The School Climate Committee will meet on a monthly basis to build a strong school community. They will address issues among staff, students and the larger community and plan activities. Parent Engagement Activities such as Family Math night and Family Literacy Night will promote fun learning activities that can be done at home. Educators Students Parents Students Parents Positive Behaviors Supports will be consistent across the school to help students develop their emotional, social, and academic skills. Students Students will be supported in their social and emotional growth through the Restorative Circles Initiative. Sampling of teachers from different grades will attend NYC DOE Restorative Circles initiative to encourage character development amongst students as well as sensitivity training among teachers and school staff. Middle School Students Students Students will confer with their teachers and be responsible to understand their present level of performance and what they need to do to improve. Students will take ownership of their learning and be able to participate in Student Led Conferences with their parents and teachers. Monthly Assembly programs showcase student learning through exhibitions, skits, debates, Powerpoint presentations, poetry, art, etc.... In addition, students are presented with awards and certificates for Student of the Month, Honor Roll, and other achievements. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept. through June Members from each constituent of the school community. Administrative staff and Teachers Educators Guidance counselor Educators Educators Sept. through JuneSept. through June Sept. through June Sept. through June Sept. through June Students Parents Sept. through June Administrative Staff Teachers Educators 9  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Assembly programs showcase student learning through exhibitions, skits, debates, Powerpoint presentations, poetry, art, etc.... In addition, students are presented with awards and certificates for Student of the Month, Honor Roll, and other achievements. Student data e.g. incident reports will inform the focus of character development instruction and PBIS. Monthly Family Engagement Nights will occur to inform parents about the curriculum, empower parents with strategies and activities to support their children. Parent Meetings to promote health and nutrition, effective parenting skills, and life skills are planned on a monthly basis according to the parents' needs as indicated on a survey. These meetings are hosted by the Parent Coordinator who works along with Community Based Organizations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments:  PBIS Training for teachers  Committee Meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the school will demonstrate progress in increasing communication We will provide a survey and look at the feedback from the Bright Idea Box that will be checked biweekly. The School Climate Committee will collect this data to share the thoughts of school staff. We will also provide feed back from the PBIS student data. For each activity that engages parents, we are providing a feedback form to gather information to assess what they like/don’t like and how we can improve practices. Observe qualitative supports through technology, such as Class Dojo. Students Teachers and families are able to monitor performance. 0  Teacher and students will have written and documented evidence of their feedback on their weekly conference. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. .NYS and MOSL Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our data indicates that our students are not making adequate progress in performance as measured by the New York State English Language Arts and Math Assessments. The performance level of general education students exceeds the performance level of Special Education students and English Language Learners (ELL). The analysis of General Education students in grades 3-8 shows that of the 373 students who participated in the New York State English Language Arts Assessment, 17% of students achieved level 1; 41% of students achieved level 2; and 42% students achieved level 3 and 4. Out of the 314 students who participated in the New York State Math Assessment, 25% of students achieved level 1; 41% of students achieved level 2; and 34% of students achieved level 3 and 4. Inquiry teams (2016-17) looked at student data and engaged in and developed relevant strategies to meet student needs and increase student progress in Math and ELA. Feedback from our Quality Review indicates that we need to focus on developing teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is: (a) informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson’s Framework for Teaching; (b) aligned to the curricula; engaging; and (c) meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will participate in Teacher Teams to develop effective strategies to improve student achievement as measured by a 10% increase in the amount of students who achieve a level 3 and 4 on the NYS ELA, Math, and Science tests . 2 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Teachers Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Sept.2018 through June 2019 Administrative Staff, Teacher Leaders, Administrative Staff, Teachers, Paras Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers meet collaboratively on a regular basis during the extended day to plan and analyze student work. They will use their findings to inform instruction. We will use the Data Wise Protocol to collaborate on developing effective strategies to increase achievement levels and improve student progress. We will shift the structure of our learning cycles to include teams that are configured to address the needs of the sub-groups and the initiatives of the school. This includes teams that are:    vertically aligned to ensure continuity and quality of instruction focused on Special Education and ENL students focused on school initiatives such as infusing a growth mindset and integrating STEM instruction As part of the cycle, teachers will integrate inter-visitations with their colleagues to deepen their study of instruction and learning. Special Education teachers will meet in a Professional Learning Cohort to focus on improving instructional strategies, IEP Goals, progress monitoring, etc... Teachers Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Administrative Staff ENL Teachers will meet in a Professional Learning Cohort to focus on improving instructional strategies and modifications to improve the achievement of ELL students. Teachers will share their expertise and turnkey professional learning during “Marvelous Monday” professional learning sessions. Teachers and Paras Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Administrative Staff, PD Committee 3 Teachers will communicate with parents to provide information about their child's progress, inform them about the curriculum, and impart information about strategies that may be helpful. Administrators, Teachers and Paras Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Sept. 2018 through June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will communicate with parents to provide information about their child's progress, inform them about the curriculum, and impart information about strategies that may be helpful via Class Dojo and Skedula. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will create teacher schedules with common prep times. We will use parent engagement time on Tuesdays to give parents access to the school library and computers to access Pupil Path. We will provide parents with monthly family engagement activities, curriculum and standards information sessions, and opportunities to become involved in the school community. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administrators will review agendas of collaborative meetings and provide support and guidance to ensure that they are aligned with the inquiry cycle and ground in data. Administrators and teachers will monitor how strategies are being used through observations and inter-visitations. Feedback will be given by colleagues and Administrators, and teachers will self-reflect on their practice. Student work will be examined to determine progress. i-Ready check in Benchmark Assessments will reflect a 5% increase in the number of students on or above grade level.. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 4  Progress will be measured by: Monitoring the attendance/sign in sheets which indicate the level of parent involvement. The administrative team will conduct regular ongoing 'walk-throughs and observations to monitor instruction and the implementation of instructional practices. Teacher Teams will access their progress by using student data. They will then share their findings with the school community: Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have a strong Professional Learning Community that values collaboration and sharing best practices. According to the School Survey, 92% of teachers feel that the school's leadership is able to develop a climate of inclusiveness and a clear vision for student achievement, and seeks input of all members of the school community. The following initiatives were determined from a close review of State Data, MOSL results, Instructional Walkthroughs, summative classroom data, and teacher input. This year, we have two priority needs:   Supplement the ReadyGen and Code-X curriculum to fill the gaps. Guided and independent reading, grammar, and writing workshop will be infused. All teachers will focus on Writing across the curriculum. Implement the i-Ready Program in ELA and Math to support foundational skills. Teacher Teams will conduct inquiry studies designed to deepen the analysis of data to more effectively target instruction and supplement the curriculum to provide a balanced literacy approach. Two ELA and two Math Foundational Periods are scheduled each week to support this initiative. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will increase their performance on the NYS Assessments by 5% in ELA and Math, by modifying the curriculum and delving deeper into the data to target instruction for individual student needs. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Develop a schedule/time frame for teachers to analyze data. Teachers will utilize i-Ready and small group instruction to develop Math foundational skills and increase fluency. During family engagement activities, parents will be informed about the curriculum and the strategies that are being used. They will be provided with resources and activities to continue the learning at home. Students Sept 2018 -June 2019 Educators Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Educators Supplementing Ready Gen with Balanced Literacy to increase student reading levels. Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Educators Facilitate writers workshop to help students develop skills to respond in depth to constructed responses. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During family engagement activities, parents will be informed about the curriculum and the strategies that are being implemented. They will be guided through the instructional strategies and provided with resources and activities to continue the learning at home. Parents will be informed about the expectations of the NYS Grade Level Standards. Parents will have input about how they can contribute to the school community during Principal Koffee Klatches, PTA Meetings, and School Leadership Meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session / Per Diem funds 7  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will participate in differentiated monthly professional developments to enhance their skill in the priority areas. Administrators and teachers will monitor how strategies are being used through observations and inter-visitations. Feedback will be given by colleagues and administrators, and teachers will self-reflect on their practice. Student work will be examined to determine progress. i-Ready check in Benchmark Assessments will reflect a 5% increase in the number of students on or above grade level.. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase of students performing on grade level on the i-Ready Mid- checkpoint. An informal School Climate Committee survey conducted with parents and teachers will reflect an 5% increase of positive responses. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Strengths (2017-2018 school survey):  97%- Families state that the school communicates in a language that they can understand.  97%- Families state that the school is welcoming and they are greeted well each time they contact the school. Careful analysis of the School Survey, recommendations, and feedback from parents, teachers, and students have informed us that: ● Parents have expressed a need for more communication regarding their child’s progress. ● Parents have expressed a desire to learn more about the CCLS and how they can support their children at home. ● A need for continuous opportunities to promote frequent staff communication to create positive relationships among all school constituents, enhance communication, and create an open-door policy to facilitate the sharing of pedagogical practices across the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will develop a more collaborative partnership with families and community organizations as measured by a 5% increase in the school culture section of the NYC School Survey. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? In an effort to continue to promote a supportive school environment, the School Climate Committee will deepen their work . They will promote ongoing monthly community building activities designed to enhance both interpersonal and professional relationships, and share school wide best practices. Instructional Staff Committee members Ongoing on a monthly basis -Sept. - June The school will use parent engagement time to offer workshops, family activities, library and computer access to families, and host individual meetings. Teachers Each grade will partner with cultural institutions, community members and community organizations in a collaborative effort to enrich student learning and make it personally meaningful. The school has partnered with local pre-school to engage in a Reading buddies program. The school has partnered with the local nursing home with the 'Adopt a Grandparent' program. Teachers Sept. through June on a weekly basis Teachers, administration, parent coordinator, librarian Ongoing Sept. through June Teachers, Administration, Guidance Counselor Students will take ownership of their own learning and progress by utilizing their accounts on Pupil Path. They will be reflective learners and conduct student led conferences (SLC) with their parents and teachers during Parent-Teacher Conferences . Teachers, students in grades K-8 Parent conference in the Fall and Spring Teachers , Administration, Guidance Counselor Steps will be taken to improve communication with parents who do not speak English. At their first point of entry, parents will be accommodated with an opportunity to identify their native language and receive assistance . ELL Parents Ongoing Teachers, Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. YWCA, YMCA Swimming, Urban Advantage, Alegbra for All, Computer Science for All, College Access for All, CUNY Creative Arts Team, Arts Engage, Cook Shop, York College, NYU School of Engineering Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 0  Per session funds for meetings Funds to support Datacation / Pupil Path Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the satisfaction level of the school constituents on the Climate Committee School Survey. The climate committee will survey staff members regarding their needs in September and their evaluation / reflection in February. Attendance of parent engagement sessions will be monitored. Parent surveys will be taken to identify needs and areas of interest in September and in February. A survey will be given to students, teachers, and parents in February. The benchmark target is a 10% increase in the satisfaction level of satisfied parents, teachers, and students compared to the previous year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1 or 2 students who have not made adequate progress after Tier 1 Intervention strategies Level 1 or 2 students who have not made adequate progress after Tier 1 Intervention strategies Level 1 or 2 students who have not made adequate progress after Tier 1 Intervention strategies Level 1 or 2 students who have not made adequate progress after Tier 1 Intervention strategies Students who have demonstrated inadequate progress in social, emotional, academic areas Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Targeted Reading Program, indirect pupil services (PRIM) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group or one-to-one During the day Targeted Math Program Small group or one-to-one During the day Small group or one-to-one During the day Small group or one-to-one During the day Small group or one-to-one During the day Cross curricular remediation of deficiencies identified on Science MOSL Cross curricular remediation of deficiencies identified on Social Studies MOSL The Guidance Counselor provides at-risk counseling in behavior and coping Small group or one-to-one strategies to overcome emotional obstacles. 2  The Speech teacher provides at risk speech services. The Social Worker and/or Guidance Counselor provides crisis and emotional support as needed. The Nurse provides health related services such as asthma management. The School Psychologist addresses the needs of at-risk students as needed. The LRE or SIT Committee address the needs of at risk students as needed. 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are currently 27 Students in Temporary Housing:  Doubled-Up (18 Students) Shelter (4 Students)   Hotel / Motel (5 Students)  Other Temporary Living Situation (0 Students) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The school will collect data to assess the needs of the students. Students will be be provided with basic necessities such as school supplies, clothing, book-bags, and books. Transportation is provided for students to travel to and from school. Students will be provided with academic support and intervention programs. Counseling services, family supports, and interventions will be provided. 4  Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We are a Title 1 school. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. We are a Title 1 School. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We are a Title 1 School. 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● The school partners with Adelphi University, Queens College, St. John’s University, and Hofstra University to locate highly qualified candidates (HQT). We also recruit HQT candidates from the Teach America and Teaching Fellows Program. ● We formulate a school-level hiring committee to screen prospective candidates through a process that includes an interview, reference check, demo lesson and a review of New York State certification / licensing. ● In order to attract candidates that are aligned with our school vision, we developed a brochure to provide information about our school profile and culture. We also developed interview questions that align to the expectations of an ideal candidate and the Danielson Framework. ● New teachers are provided with a teacher mentor, a buddy teacher, and regularly scheduled New Teacher Training Sessions to help promote their professional growth and development and enhance their lesson planning, instructional delivery, and content knowledge. ● We provide high quality professional development to ensure that staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● We maintain a professional learning community for all of our staff members. We encourage collaboration and teamwork by providing teachers with common planning time to meet with their colleagues. ● We offer a variety of internal and external professional development opportunities for our teachers to enhance their practice, implement the Common Core Instructional Standards, and develop their abilities to meet the needs of Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners. ● The school maintains a professional library to promote promising and effective practices in an atmosphere of continuous learning. 6  ● The school provides teachers with curriculum maps, instructional resources and professional learning opportunities designed to ensure high quality instruction. In the very rare event that a teacher’s status is deemed not HQT, the principal will consult with the network Human Resources Director for guidance to ensure that the non-HQT teacher takes necessary actions to meet all requirements and deadlines. This may include some form of counseling including encouraging the teacher to become HQT through the High Objective Uniform State Standard of Evaluation (HOUSSE) system. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our school has a pre-orientation which introduces the students and families to the administration, teachers, parents, paras, the parent coordinator, PTA, classrooms and other areas of the school building. Workshops explain the kindergarten goals and objectives for students and how the goals will provide parents with the social and academic expectations for the students. We partner with the local pre-K school to provide a walk-through for families/community to ease in the transition of the students. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The MOSL team met several times to review all options. The principal’s decision, on the selection of the MOSL assessment measures, was informed by recommendations made by the MOSL team. Each month 3 hours of professional development is scheduled to provide professional development regarding the use of MOSL assessments and ADVANCE to improve instruction. In addition to MOSL, our school uses several appropriate assessment measures 7  such as common pre and post unit assessments, predictive assessments, classroom assessments, and online assessments. Teacher Teams look at student work and track student performance trends to establish flexible grouping and to provide scaffolds and extensions to accelerate student learning. The school also uses multiple assessment measures to inform professional development opportunities that are scheduled throughout the year and are aligned with Danielson, the new Core Curriculum in ELA and Math. The aforementioned are effective in building teacher capacity in the use of data assessment results to improve instructional practice . 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 6, 7, 8 5A 5A, 5C - 5B, 5C, 5D Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 308, 080 36,777 12,878 - 5,017,769 X X X - x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 8  combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/IS 268, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Elementary and Secondary Education (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Teacher Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS/IS 268 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 0  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA /State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 1  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing a web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  Using Pupil Path, Google classroom and Class-Dojo as a resource to communicate with the students and families; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2  PS/IS 268, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester and during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 3  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences;  Tuesday is Parent Engagement from 2:40-3:20pm I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 4  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 5  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: From October to April 2018, PS/IS 268Q will provide an after school enrichment program for K-3 ELL students. The program sessions will begin at 2:45 pm and end at 3:45 pm (60 minutes). A total number of 103 students will participate in the program. The students will be divided into 5 groups according to their grade levels. Each group will receive direct instruction from one certified ENL teacher. During each session, the students will be engaged in differentiated activities based on Finish Line New York ELLs workbooks. The Finish Line workbooks will foster the development of speaking, listening, reading, and writing in English. The skills will be addressed as follows: Speaking: exchanging ideas with partners based on a given prompt Listening: listening to audio texts or texts being read by teachers and responding to questions Reading / Writing: reading texts together and completing text-based responses The differentiation strategies will include, but are not limited to, collaborative work, sentence stems, Total Physical Response (TPR), visual support, and visual thinking graphic organizers. In addition, students will be rotated on Imagine Learning which is an individualized computer program that supports areas of need in their English acquisition. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The ENL teachers at PS/IS 268Q are always given the opportunity to attend professional development sessions to enhance their pedagogy and the academic opportunities of ELLs. Currently, the teachers are part of the year-long ELL professional development series offered by the Queens South Borough Field Support Center (BFSC). The teachers are required to attend all-day sessions offered by the BFSC from 8:30am to 2:30 pm. The teachers receive information on current mandates and instructional strategies that they utilize in their own instruction. In addition, the teachers serve as liaisons by facilitating professional development sessions in which they turnkey methods and strategies to school staff. 8  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: At PS/IS 268Q, the ENL teachers host a variety of parental engagement activities throughout the year to teach parents how to support their English language learners (ELLs) at home. In November 2018, the ENL teachers will host an Imagine Language and Literacy workshop for parents of new kindergarten students. Parents will receive invitations in their children's book bags. This event will take place from 5pm to 6 pm. The ENL teachers will give students and parents a virtual tour of Imagine Learning. Students will also have the opportunity to use the program in stations during the workshop. Finally, parents will receive Imagine Learning alphabet packets to reinforce students' print concepts at home. In addition, the ENL teachers will host several sessions to educate parents about the framework and expectations of the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT). The rationale of these workshops is to help parents understand the language skills that test measures so they can support their children at home. This workshop will be offered to parents of ELLs in kindergarten, grades 1 through 2, and grades 3 through 8. Parents will also be notified through flyers and on Class Dojo. Each session will take place during parent engagement on Tuesdays from 2:30 to 3:20 pm. The ENL teachers will show the parents samples of test questions from each language modality and share strategies that they can use at home to help their children develop the targeted skills. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $ 7,000  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials N/A N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per Session for 5 teachers participating in the after-school program. N/A N/A 9  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $5,878 N/A N/A $12,878 Imagine Learning Licenses N/A N/A Title III Program 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name PS/IS 268 Borough Queens School Number 268 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lissa Grant Stewart Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Darshani Singh / Sarah Flores Teacher/Subject Area Wendy Chang / Kindergarten Teacher/Subject Area Amy Felix / Second Grade Related-Service Provider Glennie Llano / Speech Superintendent Beverly Mitchell Assistant Principal Wilburn Smith Coach School Counselor Catherine Russi Parent Edna Perez Parent Coordinator Debra Simms Field Support Center Staff Member Joshua Metz Other (Name and Title) Katherine O'Brien / Math, Sci. C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 1  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 602 Total number of ELLs 94 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.61% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Currently, our students are assessed using TCRWP (concepts of print and running records.) The assessment data results indicate that our students require additional instructional support in phonemic awareness, letter recognition, and concepts of print. This data is being utilized by the elementary teachers to incorporate the Fundations Program into the flow of their day. The Fundations Program is a robust phonics program that will enhance students' phonemic awareness. Teachers also incorporate language development activities into their morning message, read alouds, and Ready GEN reading and writing tasks. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2  The ENL teachers provide a variety of scaffolds to support our ELLs. These include, but are not limited to, language objectives for Ready GEN reading and writing lessons and ELL instructional strategies provided by the Queens South Field Support Center. In addition, students are encouraged to use the Imagine Learning program. Imagine Learning is an individualized computer program that provides our students with language and literacy support. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ENL teachers analyze the scores of the NYSESLAT each year. They determine trends and patterns and assess how many students have increased their performance from the previous year. In addition, they identify modalities in which students are under-performing in order to inform the instructional focus of the following year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Based on the area of need, the ENL teachers prioritize language skills to base instruction during stand-alone, integrated, and after-school sessions. The ENL teachers are also providing professional development sessions to build the capacity of all teachers to support ELLs in the classroom. The intent is to provide ELLs with consistent language instruction in all subject areas. ELLs are also provided with an after-school program to help support their language acquisition. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Classroom teachers identify ELLS who are not making academic progress at the expected rates. They analyze formative and summative assessments to determine the skills students need to progress at the desired targets. The teachers then provide students with targeted instructional support in the classroom to boost achievement. At Tier 1 for RtI, classroom teachers identify at risk students and provide weekly small group instruction based on their needs. If the students do not respond to small group and intense interventions, they are referred to Tier 2 intervention. At Tier 2, the students receive daily small group instruction to target their needs. At Tier 3, students are referred for an evaluation to receive an IEP that identifies their goals and individual academic, language, and social needs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. At the beginning of the school year, the ENL teachers analyze the data from the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT exams. They determine trends and patterns and assess how many students have increased their performance from the previous year. In addition, they identify modalities in which students are underperforming in order to inform the instructional focus of the school year. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL teachers plot the data from the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT on a quantitative data organizer. They analyze it to determine trends and patterns and assess how many students have increased their performance from the previous year. In addition, they identify modalities in which students are underperforming in order to inform the instructional focus of the following year. This information is presented to administrators and educators to inform them of the linguistic needs of the students and strategize instructional moves to boost student achievement. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 3  a. Freestanding ENL program. Our school utilizes both the integrated and standalone programs to accommodate ELL students in grades K-8. Students either receive integrated, standalone, or both. The service students receive depends on their proficiency level and the certification(s) that the classroom teacher(s) hold. Currently, three certified teachers provide ENL instruction. The kindergarten teacher, Ms. Chang, holds both a common branch and TESOL certification. She provides the ELLs in her class with the required integrated minutes. The ENL teachers, Ms. Flores and Ms. Singh, provide integrated and standalone minutes to the remaining students. Standalone ENL is implemented homogeneously by grade and proficiency levels. On the other hand, Integrated ENL classes include students in the same grade with mixed proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teachers create a roster of all ELLs and their mandated instructional minutes based on their proficiency levels on NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. Entering and Emerging level ELLs receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction weekly (180 minutes Integrated and 180 minutes Stand-alone). Transitioning ELLs receive180 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction (90 minutes Integrated and 90 minutes of either Stand-alone or Integrated). Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA instruction or other content area per week. Commanding level ELLs receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content-area instruction is delivered in the English language using Fundations, Ready GEN, and CODEX curricula. In order to support students in meeting content goals, the ENL teachers embed language objectives into integrated and standalone lessons. During both integrated and standalone ENL, students receive small-group instruction that include, but not limited to, linguistic frames, visual support, vocabulary activities, writing scaffolds. These instructional approaches not only promote grade-level academic achievement but also English language development. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Currently, we do not have ELL students taking translated versions of standardized exams. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Currently, we do not have SIFE students enrolled in our school. b. Newcomer ELLs are provided with Fundations instruction as well as an individualized computer program, Imagine Learning, to accelerate the learning of English and reading strategies. c. Developing ELLs are engaged in instructional conversation strategies to support them in reading complex texts. They are also given the opportunity to use Imagine Learning to further support their English language development. 4  d. Long term ELLs are provided with robust instruction in ELA that is focused on reading compelling content based texts. Students continue to use the instructional conversation strategies to read, speak, and write academically. e. Former ELL students continue to receive services up to two years after scoring Commanding on the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Content-area instruction is delivered in the English language using Fundations, Ready GEN, and CODEX curricula. Teachers of ELLs and SWDs supplement the curricula with materials to enrich and scaffold lessons to meet students' needs. These materials may include rich literature and informational texts to further support comprehension of concepts. Instructional strategies include preparing students to learn by tapping into their prior knowledge and building content knowledge. For example, teachers use visuals and technology, such as video clips. Teachers also provide differentiated materials and collaborative learning to provide access to academic content and build students' language skills. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers frequently review students' IEPs to understand their annual goals. They then make modifications to the curriculum to provide multiple entry points for these students. These modifications may include, but are not limited to, visual support, graphic organizers, and bilingual dictionaries. Many teachers also teach students to conduct daily self-assessments to monitor their goals. Teachers provide as many scaffolds as possible with the intent of mainstreaming students to the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Currently, the ENL teachers integrate with classroom teachers to support the ELLs in ELA. The ENL teachers provide intervention through small group instruction. They design language objectives for each integrated lesson. This allows them to target the language skills and scaffolds the ELLs need to access the objectives of the lessons. In these integrated sessions, the teachers provide support to ELLs at all proficiency levels. However, they gradually release the students' dependence on the teacher and scaffolds as they improve their English language skills. In addition to these services, ELLs in grades K through 3 are invited to participate in the ENL after school program. This program is offered once per week from November to May. It provides the students with additional practice listening, speaking, reading, and writing in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Enrollment student data for the 2017-18 school year indicates that the school's ELL population will consist of low proficiency ELLs in the upper grades. As a result, the ENL teachers along with the principal will consider extending the after school program to these students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A. The school has never opened a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs in grades K through 3 are invited to participate in the ENL after school program. This program is offered once per week from November to May. It provides the students with additional practice listening, speaking, reading, and writing in English. In addition, students may enroll for BOKS and the SONYC after school program. ELLs have the same opportunities as the rest of the students in the school. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 5  Content-area instruction is delivered in the English language using Fundations, Ready GEN, and CODEX curricula. Teachers supplement these instructional materials with computer programs, manipulatives, subscription magazines and media, and technology. The ENL teachers also utilize materials from professional developments that include, but are not limited to, linguistic frames, visual support, vocabulary activities, and writing scaffolds. Students also log on to Imagine Learning, an individualized computer program that provides literacy and language intervention. These instructional approaches not only promote grade-level academic achievement but also English language development. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Both classroom and ENL teachers utilize the students' native language through translation and bilingual dictionaries to support their understanding of the content. Additionally, paraprofessionals provide native language support as needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Classroom teachers use curricula and the Common Core Learning Standards to guide their instruction. They also refer to can-do descriptors by proficiency level for ELLs to further support their needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A. The school is not split into multiple locations. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parent orientation sessions are provided to all parents and newly enrolled students in May. Parents and students meet the teachers, tour the building and receive summer packets to prepare for the new school year. This opportunity allows them to become familiar with the school community and form bonds with the other members of their cohort. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Chinese is offered to all grade 6, 7, and 8 students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A. The school does not currently offer a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teachers attend monthly professional development series offered by the Queens South Field Support Center. After trying out the strategies in their own classrooms, the teachers promote them through Monday professional development sessions and a monthly newsletter. The intent is to support teachers to work effectively with ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 6  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL teachers attend monthly professional development series offered by the Queens South Field Support Center. Meanwhile, teachers who are professionally certified complete Continuing Teacher & Leader Education Hours (CTLE) hours. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The Tuesday Parent Engagement time is utilized for individualized meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss the goals of the program, students' language development and language proficiency results. Staff members or phone interpretation services are utilized to provide language access. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Throughout the year, all parents are invited to attend curriculum night family events. In addition, the ENL teachers host several events specific to ELL parents and students. These include, but are not limited to, the ELL Orientation Meeting and Imagine Learning workshops. The teachers also schedule meetings on Tuesday afternoons to discuss students' progress with their parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. None. 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lissa Grant Stewart, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS/IS268 School DBN: 29Q268 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Lissa Grant Stewart Title Principal Wilburn Smith Assistant Principal Debra Simms Parent Coordinator Darshani Singh ENL/Bilingual Teacher Edna Perez Parent Wendy Chang/ Kindergarten Teacher/Subject Area Amy Felix/ Grade 2 Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Catherine Russi School Counselor Beverly Mitchell Joshua Metz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ELL Coordinator Katherine O'Brien Other Teacher Leader Glennie Llano Other Service Provider Sarah Flores Other ENL Teacher Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 08/01/2017 08/01/2017 08/01/2017 08/01/2017 08/01/2017 08/01/2017 08/01/2017 08/01/2017 08/01/2017 08/01/2017 08/01/2017 08/01/2017 08/01/2017 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 29Q268 School Name: PS/IS 268Q Superintendent: Beverly Mitchell The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Debra Simms Parent coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school gathers parents' preferred language of communication using their Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) along with their emergency contact cards. These documents indicate that the majority of our parents prefer that we communicate with them, both in written and oral forms, in their home language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic 1 100 1 100 0  Bengali Haitian Creole Spanish Tamil Urdu 7 2 37 1 1 100 100 100 100 100 7 2 37 1 1 100 100 100 100 100 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? ELL parent orientation announcements September Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit Meet the teacher night notices September PTA After school permission slips October DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit Parent-teacher conference notices November, March, May PTA Family event flyers All year PTA, DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Individualized Educational Plan (IEP) meetings All year interpretation service(s)? PTA, bilingual teachers, paraprofessionals 1  ELL parent orientation September Parent engagement meetings Tuesdays Parent-teacher conferences November, March, May Curriculum nights All year PTA, bilingual teachers, paraprofessionals PTA, bilingual teachers, paraprofessionals PTA, bilingual teachers, paraprofessionals PTA, bilingual teachers, paraprofessionals 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, our school enlists all available bilingual staff members to contact limited English proficient families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During our school's opening conference, staff members will read Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and receive a list of translation and interpretation resources. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Below is a description of how our school fulfills parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services: The multilingual welcome poster is displayed at the entrance of our school. At PTA, Title I, and parent-teacher meetings, the Parents' Bill of Rights is distributed to parents. Our parent coordinator refers parents to the NYC DOE website where they can download the Parents' Guide to Language Access. Our security personnel has been provided with a Language ID Guide. This document is also readily available in our parent coordinator's office. 2  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At the end of meetings, parents will be asked to complete surveys to gather feedback on the quality of language services at our school . 3 
