 School Name: 27Q273 P.S. 273 Principal: BRENDA WARD   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 273 342700010273 Pre-K - 5 School Number (DBN): 27Q273 88-07 102 Street, Richmond Hill, New York 11418 718-286-8300 Phone Number: 718-286-8310 Fax: Brenda Ward Bward2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Brenda Ward Renee Williams Mayra Silva Josefina Peralte N/A N/A Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Jennifer Ambert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, New York 11416 jambert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5770 Phone Number: 718-348-2994 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) South Queens Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director:   82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, New York 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-642-5839 Phone Number: 718-348-2994 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Brenda Ward Renee Williams Mayra Silva Josefina Peralte Ruth Rodriguez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Vanessa Dabydeen Isabel Cardenas Vanessa McMahon DevikaSuknannan SyedaChoudhury Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Paraprofessional Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to prepare leaders who are college and career ready! To accomplish our goal, it is important that we begin with the end in mind- a focus on college and career readiness. Our goal is to provide a first-class education and have 100% of our students achieve their personal best to ensure academic and cultural excellence in their elementary school years. Our work at this educational level is to provide our students the inspiration, motivation and necessary tools to graduate from middle school, high school, pursue higher education at top four-year colleges, and attain meaningful career paths while being committed to giving back to their community.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. While our school has many strengths, we would like to highlight the following: 1) we have developed a cool school culture where we enjoy an intimate, nurturing and inviting learning environment – resulting in all of our teachers scoring effective or highly effective on the Advance System in Domain 2: Classroom Environment; 2) we have experienced and highly qualified teachers who care deeply about, and are vested in, our children’s success and therefore work collaboratively to ensure that we are meeting the needs of our students; and 3) we have a very supportive parent body who participates in and supports our school decision-making policies. Our students come first and we always find the third way to meet their needs. We are a multicultural school consisting of approximately 24 different ethnic backgrounds. Our diverse community is welcomed as we continue to promote a very respectful and supportive learning environment. Each month we celebrate the special holidays and traditions of our lives that make each of us special - such as our Hispanic and African American Heritage Month Celebrations, Multicultural Fest, Celebration of Lights, Music and Art Festivals and more. We adopted the Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS). It is important that we provide and maintain a nurturing school environment that is conducive to learning where all members of the school community are respectful, responsible and kind to one another. Our learning community has been accepted into the PROSE (Progressive Redesign Schools for Excellence) Initiative. This initiative supports us in developing academic and cultural excellence, including opportunities and support for our families to act as advocates and partners in their child's education. Our scheduling flexibilities include, flexible time for completing parent engagement work. Teachers and paraprofessionals have the option of selecting a time frame for parent engagement in the morning, afternoons or evenings to accommodate the needs of our parents; and four half days to conduct Social Emotional Learning (SEL) Professional Learnings and time for scoring and analyzing benchmark assessments. This year, to support our students in need of additional academic support, we will implement the MaxScholar Reading Intervention Program and ST Math. Max Scholar is an online multi-sensory program that uses the Orton-Gillingham approach to teach students phonics, phonemic awareness, reading of words, fluency, and writing. ST Math incorporates the latest research in learning and the brain and promotes mastery-based learning and mathematical understanding. The ST Math software games use interactive, graphically-rich animations that visually represent mathematical concepts to improve conceptual understanding and problem-solving skills. We will implement year three of The Leader in Me process (TLIM) and Compass Learning. TLIM is designed to help our students succeed both in and out of the classroom. Through the use of Franklin Covey's 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, students will begin to understand that they have control over much of what happens in their lives and that they can be true leaders. Their choices can affect their day, their relationships and their future. Parent workshops will be conducted to ensure that parents participate in this process as well. Our goal is to have our learning community 0  internalize these 7 Habits that will promote college and career readiness. Year three implementation will focus on aligning academics through school, class, teacher and student goal-setting. We received a multi-year grant to participate in Compass Learning on-line program. Compass Learning is a reading and math learning acceleration program that specializes in digital curriculum solutions for intervention and blended learning. We are excited about continuing to roll out these initiatives that have been strategically selected to improve student outcomes and teacher practice. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The needs of our English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students With Disabilities (SWDs) populations are varied ranging from behavioral, emotional and social needs, learning difficulty, communication/language needs, physical and sensory needs. Given this broad spectrum, teachers utilize a variety of strategies to maximize student achievement, including, but not limited to the following:  maintaining organized classrooms and limiting distractions   utilizing a range of "making thinking visible" strategies to promote accountable talk opportunities and incorporating the arts and technology in instruction increase engagement  breaking down instruction into smaller, manageable tasks  using multi-sensory strategies  structuring/modifying lessons that will lead to successful results and include immediate reinforcements as a way to keep students motivated  explicit teaching through teacher modeling and demonstration to establish clear expectations for success   using and displaying anchor charts/exemplars throughout the classroom that students can use as reference assessing students’ prior knowledge and pre-teaching before teaching new content guides  using a variety of graphic organizers, visual aids, and student partnerships for peer support  Incorporating checks for understanding throughout the lesson and using checklists to monitor and gather data on student learning and participation incorporating Move to Improve strategies in order to keep the students physically active and cognitively engaged in the learning  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school made the most progress over the past year in the following areas: Strong Family-Community Ties   Collaborative Teachers  Supportive Environment Our key area of focus will be providing Rigorous Instruction, especially for our SWDs and ELLs - where students will be expected to learn at high levels, supported so he/she can learn at high levels and is able to demonstrate their learning at high levels. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q273 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 340 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 22 22 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 17 17 3 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 87.6% % Reduced Lunch 12.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.5% 72.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.25 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 38.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 98% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 34 36 93.0% 5.0% 15.9% 5.0% 16.2% 3.8% 0 0% 5 41.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-2018 State ELA and Math Assessment data revealed the following: Overall, 41% of our 3rd - 5th graders scored proficient on the State Math Exam. This was an increase of 4% from the previous year. On the State Math Exam:  49% of our third graders demonstrated proficiency - this was an increase of 4% from the previous year. Our third graders who scored at levels 2-4, increased 2%  54% of our fourth graders demonstrated proficiency - this was an increase of 14% from the previous year (with our English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities populations making notable gains of 29% and 15%, respectively. Fourth graders scoring at levels 2-4 increased 4%  Our fifth graders had a 2 percentage point decrease in students scoring at levels 3 and 4 as compared to the previous year. However, fifth graders scoring at levels 2-4 increased 7% Our 2018 June Instructional Reports revealed that our students needed more support to improve their constructed response. Overall, 37% of our 3rd - 5th graders scored proficient on the State ELA Exam. This was an increase of 4% from the previous year. On the State ELA Exam:  53% of our third graders demonstrated proficiency - this was a notable increase of 20% from the previous year. Our third graders who scored at levels 2-4, increased 16%;  33% of our fourth graders demonstrated proficiency - this was a decrease of 12% from the previous year (with our Students with Disabilities population making a notable gain of 14%). Our fourth graders who scored at levels 2-4, increased 4% 3   Our fifth graders had a 2 percentage point increase in students scoring levels 3-4; and a 7 percentage point increase in students scoring levels 2-4. Consequently, our level 1 student population is decreasing. Strengths: According to our 2014-2015 Quality Review Report, Indicator 3.4 was an Area of Celebration with findings revealing that the principal consistently communicates high expectations to staff and students and partners with families. Providing rigorous instruction, systematic and explicit small/targeted group and large group instruction, analysis of formative and summative data, along with high expectations and actively engaged students, are required to close the achievement gap. According to our 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools: School Quality Guide, the following three areas scored the highest:  Academic Press  Quality of Student Discussions  Common Core Shifts in Math Common Core Shifts in Math showed an 11% positive response increase from the previous year - from 89% to 100%, while Common Core Shifts in Literacy decreased 4 percentage points from 96% to 92%. This increase can be directly attributed to instructional decisions implemented by the vertical math team: Assessments were aligned to the curriculum, graphic organizers and math mats to assist with problem solving were standardized across the school, fluency activities at the beginning of each lesson were implemented each day, and common spreadsheets were created for chapter and unit assessments enabling teachers to better analyze the data. Needs: Our 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools: School Quality Guide indicates that Rigorous Instruction ranked number five out of the six elements at 3.32 with Quality of Student Discussion receiving the lowest score (79%). This was a decrease of 2 percentage points from the previous year. Based on our Grades 3-5 State Assessment data, math remains a focus to close the achievement gap. The Item Skills Analysis Tool data for our State ELA and Math Assessments revealed a significant decrease in student performance on the constructed response questions as compared to the multiple choice questions. While all grades showed tremendous growth on our End of the Year Go Math Benchmark Assessment, the data revealed the overall percentage of students (including SWDs) scoring proficient as compared to the beginning of the year data as follows:  Grade 1 - 54% (+52% increase)  Grade 2 - 65% (+62% increase)  Grade 3 - 52% (+52% increase)  Grade 4 - 68% (+68% increase)  Grade 5 - 25% (+25% increase) In order to close the achievement gap and to ensure that our students are college and career ready, math teachers will receive extensive professional learning in math to develop content knowledge and incorporate math talk and strategies to meet the needs of individual students into lesson plans. We have structured our Marvelous Monday Professional Learning sessions to include regular times for vertical math teacher teams to meet to establish best practices across grades; data analysis; and teacher-led professional learning to increase building capacity and teacher leadership skills. 4  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will demonstrate a 5% increase in proficiency on their explanations of the constructed-response questions as measured by the end of the year Math PARCC Assessment. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Grades 2-5 teachers will create a scaffolding math toolkit for students promoting productive struggle in their mathematical cognition and independence. Grade 5 math teachers will participate in Algebra for All professional learning to improve math skills, outcomes and readiness for high school math. This initiative will allow teachers to: Grades 2-5 November 2018-June 2019 Twice a month Teachers and Administrators Grade 5 Teachers, Principal The following dates during the 2018-19 school year: Teachers and Administrators 10/10,12/5,1/24,3/6,5/16  focus particularly on the content that is critical to student success in their grade and essential for later work in Algebra  expand their repertoire of strong instructional practices and strategies to support our ELL, SWD and bottom 1/3 subgroup  minimize any math anxiety they may have  strengthen their capacity to serve as content experts Teachers will meet in vertical teams during Professional Learning time to vertically plan and incorporate math talk opportunities into their lesson plans to support students within the following subgroups (ELL, SWD, bottom 1/3) ability to reason mathematically and their ability to communicate that reasoning verbally and in writing. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Grades K-5 October 2018-June 2019 Teachers and Administrators Twice a month How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers / Grade Teams will develop and conduct workshops during Parent Engagement sessions that will cover the following topics: the Next Generation Learning Standards; and math strategies between November 2018-May 2019. 6  Teachers and grade teams will utilize Class Dojo and their bimonthly newsletter to inform parents of upcoming workshops. The Parent Coordinator will elicit parent volunteers to lead parent workshops, and school outreach. The Parent Association will assist in planning family math game night. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Administrators, Teachers, ENL Teacher, Teacher Teams ● Teacher Guides, Unit and Benchmark Assessments from Go Math, Engage NY, NYC Performance Task, Rally and Ready supplemental materials ● Teacher Per Session ● Copy paper ● Folders ● Chart Paper ● Graphic Organizers ● 5 Math Practices book Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase in students scoring proficient on their explanations of the constructed-response questions as measured by the middle of the year School-wide Math Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Beginning, Middle and End of the Year Math Benchmark Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to our 2014-2015 Quality Review Report, Indicator 3.4 was an Area of Celebration with findings revealing that the principal consistently communicates high expectations to staff and students and partners with families. According to the 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools: School Quality Guide, Support Environment ranked as the highest out of the six elements. The 2017-2018 Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) data indicates that only five infractions occurred. There were no Teacher Removals, and no Principal/Superintendent suspensions. Strengths: According to our 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools: School Quality Guide, specific areas of strength in this element includes: Safety (97%)   Classroom Behavior (80%)   Peer Support for Academic Work (86%). Social-Emotional (85%), and Based on the Student Survey administered to students in Grades 2-5 in June 2018, students responded "yes" to the following statements: I feel safe in my classroom. (87%)   My teachers would give me help if I needed it (98%)  My family wants me to do well in school. (96%) Needs: During 2018-2019 school year, we will begin Year 3 of our Leader in Me Process. We need to focus on establishing systems that will support the alignment of academics to the leadership principles. In order to maintain a school culture that can proactively support student learning by setting high standards for student behavior and academic achievement, it is imperative that we encourage student leadership/ownership, collaboration and track progress toward meeting our expectations and goals by fostering students ability to be 8  independent learners. Students will develop a personal leadership binder with their academic and social goals. Students will update and monitor their progress towards their goals bimonthly. Accountability partners will be assigned to support students in tracking students progress towards their academic and social-emotional goals in order to address and monitor the needs of the whole child. Teachers will develop a schedule to meet with students individually to assist in goal planning and reviewing student's work products towards meeting goals. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of the teachers will integrate at least four tasks that support our implementation of The 7 Habits of Effective People into their lessons and unit plans. 9 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff The Leader in Me facilitators; The Lighthouse Team; Administrators October 2018-June 2019 Twice a month Staff; Students September 2018-June 2019 Teachers; the Lighthouse Team; Administrators Twice a month Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Time will be allocated during Professional Learning on Mondays for grade and vertical teams to reflect on their pedagogical practices. Teams will plan and ensure that tasks have been developed and integrated to promote student self management and agency. These practices will be supported through The Leader In Me Field Guide and Best Practices. We will develop a school wide academic WIG (Wildly Important Goal) written in the form of “From X to Y by When” format and will be tracked on a public scoreboard to monitor progress toward attainment. Students will identify their area in need of improvement " X " and determine their desired outcome "Y" with a due date and action steps. Teachers will integrate at least four tasks that promote student independence through self assessment, goal setting and monitoring to support our implementation of The 7 Habits of Effective People Grade teams and/or classes will collaboratively develop a WIG written in a “From X to Y by When” format that will be tracked on a compelling scoreboard to monitor progress. Teachers will engage students in regular conversations around progress toward their WIGs. Teachers; Students September 2018-June 2019 Grade Teams; Teachers; The Lighthouse team Administrators; TLIM Coach & Consultant Administrators; Teachers; Students Teachers; Students Twice a month September 2018-June 2019 Once a month the third week of the month September 2018-Student-led town hall meetings will take place in grade bands once a month to reflect on the impact of the 7 Habits on student learning and school culture. Students By October 2018, classroom behavior plans/mission statements will be co-created by teachers and students. Teachers; students 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement October 2018 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. While The Leader in Me workshops facilitated by our Parent Certified Trainer (Parent Coordinator) will be opened to all parents from October 2018 - May 2019, special sessions will be held for our parent leaders and Title I Parent Committee members. All families will be asked to develop a family mission statement and a family WIG. Family mission statements will be posted within the school to welcome, encourage, and develop partnerships with families. The Lighthouse Team along with the parent coordinator will share resources to help families develop their WIGs and goals . Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Franklin Covey consultants, Parent Coordinator, Teacher Team (the Lighthouse Team), Administrators   Per diem coverages  Per Session for Teachers   Resources for Parent workshops  copy paper (flyers) Instructional resources (workbooks, DVDs, student and teacher guides) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 85% of the teachers will integrate at least two tasks that support our implementation of The 7 Habits of Effective People into their lessons and unit plans. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Leader in Me Implementation Rubric and Student Leadership Binders Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our 2014-2015 Quality Review Report, Indicator 4.2 was an Area of Celebration with findings revealing that teachers engage in structured professional collaborations using an inquiry approach and systematic analysis that strengthens their instructional capacity and focus on improved student learning. Embedded distributed leadership structures enable effective teacher leadership. According to the 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools: School Quality Guide, Collaborative Teachers ranked number four out of the six elements. Cultural awareness and inclusive classroom instruction ranked the highest at 98%, while Quality of Professional Development ranked the lowest at 74%. However, we scored higher than the District and City Averages. Strengths: Our 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools: School Quality Guide results revealed that we scored .32 and .46 above the district and city averages in the Collaborative Teachers element, respectively. We scored 3% and 4% above the district and city averages, respectively in the areas of Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction ( 98%)  Quality of Professional Development (from 76% to 74%); Needs: According to our 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools Report, there was a decrease in percentage points in the following areas: School Commitment (from 90% to 80%)   Peer Collaboration (from 96 to 92%)  Innovation and Collective Responsibility (from 87 to 79%) The report revealed that when asked about their professional development experience, 78% of the teachers responded that they did have time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas (an increase of 3% as compared to last year's results) and 52% responded that they didn't have opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools. While Peer Collaboration scored 92% positive responses, many teachers are uncomfortable providing actionable feedback to their peers which does, in fact, involve risk. In order to close the achievement gap, it is imperative that 2  teacher teams meet and conduct peer observations and engage in cycles of inquiry to improve teacher practice to ensure that students progress at the desired rate. According to our 2017-2018 June Instructional Report, the percentage of students in Grades 3-5 who scored proficient in writing is as follows:  Grade 3 - 52%  Grade 4 - 51%  Grade 5 - 65% According to our 2017-2018 End of the Year Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment 43.5% of our students are in need of improvement. Based on the NYS ELA Assessment, 37% of our Grades 3-5 students are proficient. Our key area of focus is building teacher leaders via teacher teams. Consequently, we have structured our Marvelous Monday Professional Learning sessions to include regular times for vertical teacher teams to meet (namely, ELA, Math and Special Education teams) to establish best instructional practices across grades; data analysis; and teacher-led professional learning to increase building capacity and teacher leadership skills. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will meet in professional learning communities to conduct cycles of inquiry to close the achievement gap (between students on grade level and our lowest third ) as measured by 90% of our students in Grades K-5 moving up a minimum of 2 levels on the End of the Year Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Reading Assessment. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Three to five teachers will be selected to participate in the Teacher Leadership Program to build their facilitative leadership capacity to lead professional learning communities within the following three areas: Instructional Leadership, Building a Professional Learning Community & Surfacing and Managing Controversy. Teacher leaders will: Teachers, Administrators Administrators, Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Once a month meeting  learn a variety of facilitation protocols for effective goal-setting, problem-solving, and reflective practices related to analyzing teacher and student work  explore peer coaching and inter-visitation models to engage in reflective practices to improve teaching and learning; build coherence across school-wide practices; foster authentic collaboration aligned to school-wide goals  expand the facilitators’ toolbox and draw upon a range of resources to surface and deal with conflict to sustain a safe and inclusive learning environment where productive and critical conversations commonly occur Teacher Teams will meet during Monday Professional Work Time and weekly during the Monday Professional Learning time to analyze reading assessments, identify targeted student groups and identify reading strategies that will meet the needs of our students. (Revised as of Jan. 2019) A Professional Learning Plan for the use of our Marvelous Monday Professional Learning (PL) and Professional Work (PW) sessions will be developed to reflect differentiated professional learning opportunities. This plan will be revised and updated by the PL Committee as necessary. Teachers and Paraprofessionals Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Teacher; Teacher Teams Administrators; Teachers; Paraprofessionals; PL Committee Twice a month September 2018-June 2019 Once a month 4 Teachers will complete a more comprehensive Mid-Year reflection survey to rate their professional learning and collaborative experiences to date and to offer recommendations and suggestions for improvement. Teacher Teams will identify MLL/SWD and intervention strategies and resources, and modify lesson plans to improve the academic performance of targeted students in their class.A toolkit organized by standards will be accessible on the Office 365 Teams Page. Teachers; Paraprofessionals February 2019 Teachers; Paraprofessionals Grades K-5 Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Teachers and Teacher Teams Twice a month Additionally, we have restructured the Intervention Period to allow for homogeneous student groupings according to F&P levels and grade bands (K-1, 2-3, 4-5). Grades K-5 Teachers January 2019-June 2019 Administrators, Teachers and Teacher Teams Monday - Thursday 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers and Grade Teams will ensure that students and parents are provided with rubric-based feedback after assessments (where appropriate) and during student-led conferences that clearly outlines their next learning steps. Notification of the restructuring will be communicated to parents via our Parent Newsletter and Dojo. Parents will be asked to assist their child in tracking their progress towards their WIGs and academic goals each marking period. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teacher's College Units of Study  Per diem teacher coverages  Per session  Chart paper  Copy paper  Access to technology/laptops  Online resources Library resources  Learning Intervention Manual by Samm N. House  Facilitators  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 5  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By March 2019, teachers will meet in professional learning communities to conduct cycles of inquiry using the Data-Wise protocol to close the achievement gap as measured by 90% of our students in Grades K-5 moving up a minimum of 1 level on the Middle of the Year Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Reading Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Beginning , Middle and End of the Year Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2016-2017 Framework for Great Schools Report, Effective School Leadership scored 3.92, ranking as the 3rd highest out of the six elements. Strengths: The 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review/Measures of Leadership Practice (MoLP) findings identified the following Quality Review Indicators as Areas of Celebration:  1.3 (Resource Allocation)  1.4 (Learning Environment)  3.1 (Goal Setting)  3.4 (High Expectations)  4.1 (Teacher Feedback)  5.1 (Monitoring and Revising) Findings revealed that the principal is leading the work of fostering a culture of mutual trust, which supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults. She has incorporated numerous culture-building initiatives for students and families creating an inclusive environment where all members are valued and respected. The principal and staff have also made deliberate organizational decisions and uses of resources to support the school’s instructional goals and address the learning needs of staff and students to improve student outcomes. Teaching strategies provide multiple entry points into the curricula so that all learners, including English language learners (ELLs) and students with disabilities (SWDs), are active participants engaged in appropriately challenging tasks. According to the 2017-2018 Advance System Evaluations, of the 109 teacher observations evaluated using the Advance System, 96% of the teachers were rated between Effective and Highly Effective. None of of teachers were rated Developing. Needs: According to our 2014-2015 Quality Review Report, Indicator 1.2 was an Area of Focus, revealing that there were limited opportunities for students to engage in deep discussion with their peers regarding content or work products and that although student groupings were evident in all classrooms, most student work time was used for independent work. Our Quality Review Rating for 2014-2015 also revealed that there was a lack of checks for understanding during instruction, resulting in teachers not making adjustments to instruction to ensure that they are meeting the needs of all learners. Teacher Teams must meet consistently to share best practices to support better-7  informed planning that result in improved student outcomes. It is necessary that teachers adjust instruction in response to evidence of student understanding (or lack of it). The 2016-2017 School Quality Survey, revealed that only 78% of the teachers agreed that once they start a new program, they follow up to make sure that it's working. Consequently, a system will be established to ensure that teachers analyze the data gathered from our intervention programs more consistently (particularly, our on-line programs that are designed to support student learning). The results will be used to measure its impact on student achievement and shared with the learning community at large. The 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review/MoLP findings identified the following Quality Review Indicators as Areas of Focus:  1.1 (Curriculum)  1.2 (Pedagogy)  2.2 (Assessment) According to our 2017-2018 Advance System results, overall Measures of Teacher Practice revealed the following: 16% of the teachers were Highly Effective and 84% of the teachers were Effective. Overall, none of our teachers fell into the Developing or Ineffective areas. Evaluations in specific components of Domain 3, revealed the following: HE E D I Component 3b: Questioning and Discussion Techniques -- 0% 92% 8% 0% Component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning -- 6% 94% 0% 0% Component 3d: Assessment in Instruction -- 6% 80% 14% 0% While there was marked improvement in teachers being rated Highly Effective and Effective in this Domain from the previous year, teachers still need support in these components to ensure that independent tasks promote the highest levels of rigor, multiple entry points, student-to-student interactions in sharing thinking, productive struggle and ownership in work via rubric-based comments and checklists that allow students to identify their next learning steps for improvement. Consequently, the principal will focus on strengthening the professional growth of teachers in order to improve teacher practice and student outcomes, particularly in Components 3c and 3b, with a specific focus on improving evaluation results in Component 3d. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of all teachers will improve their rating in Component 3D by implementing effective strategies for using assessment in instruction as measured by Component 3d of the Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric score tracker in Advance. 8  9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Principal will review Advance data each month throughout the 2018-2019 school year to identify instructional gaps in order to differentiate and modify PL activities based on teacher needs, with a focus on Component 3D, and update staff monthly. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal School leaders and teachers will model within classrooms by grade band to demonstrate effective questioning techniques that support using assessment in instruction (Fishbowl Method) (at least 2 per grade band for year) Teachers School leaders will empower Teacher Leaders (TLP) to ensure the vision of the principal is communicated to staff clearly and that vertical teamwork is structured and focused Teachers School leaders and Teacher Leaders will facilitate PL opportunities during Monday PLs or Lunch and Learns (once a month) Teachers Professional learning committee will administer a survey (once a month) after each Professional Learning session Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal; Assistant Principal; Identified staff members September 2018-June 2019 September 2018 -June 2019 September 2018 -June 2019 Administrators; Teacher Leaders Administrators Teacher Leaders Professional Learning Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration will conduct at least one instructional walk through with both upper and lower grade class parents and parent members of the School Leadership Team each semester to promote parent leadership and engagement using the Charlotte Danielson's Framework for Teaching Rubric. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher Per Session Administrator Per Session 0  Book: Leaders of Their Own learning: Transforming Schools Through Student-Engaged Assessment Books for Book Clubs Educational Resources/Articles Webinars Laptops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, school leaders will offer a minimum of 5 PL opportunities focusing on component 3D Using Assessment in Instruction in order to improve teacher ratings by 2.5% in component 3D of the Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Advance System Score Tracker Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2014-2015 Quality Review report revealed that Indicator 3.4 was an area of celebration for our school. We received a rating of well-developed indicating that we have established a culture for learning that communicates high expectations for staff, students, and families. Our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide Report revealed that Strong Family-Community Ties received 93.% of positive responses. This component remained consistent from the previous year. Thanks to some strategic practices organized by our Parent Coordinator, our parent survey response rate increased significantly (5 percentage points) to 83% as compared to the previous year. Strengths: Parental involvement in all facets of school community is key to student success. As our parent members continue to change, it is important to maintain a strong home-school connection. We have received overwhelmingly positive feedback from parents during our post conference reviews with parents after Student-Led Conferences. Student-Led Conferences communicated not only how a student was doing, but also why. Class Dojo (an on-line communication system) proved to be an efficient way for teachers to encourage students and provide timely feedback to parents regarding student behavior and work habits. We also received overwhelmingly positive results regarding this initiative. Implementing both Student-Led Conferences and Class Dojo have ideally expanded the lines of communication between the student, parent and the teacher. Needs: Although we scored very high in parent responses on our 2016-2017 NYC School Survey with regards to Strong Family-Community Ties, our lowest score was in the Parent Involvement in School section - indicating that 82% of our parents/guardians have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. Another area in need of improvement is in the Outreach to Parents section - indicating that 85% of our parents/guardians are invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction. This area scored at 85% for the second year in a row. This indicates that we need to improve our efforts to engage parents in volunteering time to support the school and inviting parents to observe instruction; thus, partnering with us to improve student learning outcomes. 2  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in parent engagement as measured by outreach logs, sign-in sheets and parent surveys. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school will implement two Open House sessions to invite parents to observe instruction. Parents November 2018 Administrators, Teachers, Parent Coordinator March 2019 October 2018-May 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator and Administrators  Teachers will provide parent-only and parent/student Parents workshops connected to core curriculum, ELL, health and wellness, technology and online resources during Parent Engagement time so that families can become stronger partners with the school.  The Parent Coordinator will provide workshops to strengthen the home-school connection based on the assessed needs and availability of the parents and students. These workshops will include topics such as: CookShop, Parenting Skills, Child Development, The 7 Habits of Highly Effective Families, Developing family mission statements and WIGs, Students With Disabilities, English language learners (ELLs), computers, homework help, and intervention strategies to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home. We will provide written translations when necessary. Teachers will conduct Compass Learning workshops for the parents of our students with disabilities and parents of English language learners that will include how to analyze their child's data and will be provided with resources to reinforce the skills needed to improve student outcomes. Parents November 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator and Administrators Teachers will implement Class Dojo which will provide parents with online access to immediate feedback pertaining to their child’s behavior and work habits to strengthen a shared responsibility towards improving student outcomes. Parents October 2018 -November 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator and Administrators Class parents will be selected to serve the school as liaisons between the school/teacher and our families. The role of the class parent will be to assist the teacher with trips, celebrations, 4  solicit volunteers for events, identify skills among our families, attend Parent Association meetings and workshops to share the information with non-attending members to ensure that pertinent information is shared with the parents in each class. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. P.S. 273 has become a PROSE School. Allowing staff members to have flexible parent engagement time to accommodate parents' schedules. In addition, we have partnered with our Parent Association, our COMPASS after-school partnership, and the parent coordinator to provide parents with engaging and relevant events based on parent surveys and student needs to promote greater parent participation and involvement in school activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Food/Snacks Facilitators: Teachers and Parent Coordinator  Copy paper/ construction paper    Parent Guides/brochures  Technology: Laptops, Promethean Boards, manipulatives  Decorations  Games and hands-on activity Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase in parent engagement as measured by outreach logs, sign-in sheets and parent surveys. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher parent engagement logs, sign-in sheets and parent survey feedback 5  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Fountas and Pinnell Levels/Core Assessments Lowest Third – State Performance Assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Guided Reading Great Leaps Small Group, one-to-one, on-line tutoring and direct instruction based on need During the school day Imagine Learning English Compass Learning Fundations MaxScholar StarfallAdvanced Ready New York CCLS Instruction ELA Compass Learning CCLS Instruction Math ST Math Starfall Advanced Guided Reading instruction, modeling, scaffolding AmplifiedScience materials Small Group and direct instruction based on need During the school day Small Group and direct instruction based on need During the school day Mathematics Core Assessments Lowest Third – State Performance Assessments Lowest Third – State Performance Assessments Science 7  Social Studies Lowest Third – State Performance Assessments Guided Reading instruction, modeling, scaffolding Small Group and direct instruction based During the school day Core Curriculum non-fiction At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) trade books Small group and one-to-one Students identified as having behavioral challenges Small group and one-to-one based on need Restorative Practices During the school day – once a week 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently, we do not have any students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide students in temporary housing with the following: School uniforms, as needed  Bookbags with school supplies   At-risk counseling with the guidance counselor  Academic Intervention Support Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We have 100% highly qualified teachers. In order to maintain and support this status we have put the following procedures in place:  P.S. 273 has established a Hiring Committee (consisting of teachers and parents) who oversees and assists in the hiring of HQT. Teachers are identified and selected through the Open Market Transfer System and by recommendation from other HQT.  When recruiting new teachers, the Hiring Committee utilizes New Teacher Finder where we do a careful search to select top talent. After the interview, potential matches are asked to conduct a demo lesson.  New teachers are matched to mentor teachers for continued guidance and support in an effort to strongly encourage retention.  New teachers receive year-long individualized support from the Principal. Each month, the Principal meets with the new teacher(s) for at least one hour after school (paid per session) for an informal meeting to ascertain and monitor support needed. Teaching practices are monitored and evaluated using the Framework for Teaching Rubric and teachers are provided with immediate feedback to validate best practices and to improve teacher practice.  Data meetings are held with administrators at least three times per year to ensure that students are on track  to meeting grade-specific academic end-of-year goals. Inter-visitations allow teachers to observe best/promising practices and to form relationships with colleagues within the school.  We provide differentiated professional learnings that are tailored to address the needs of each teacher to ensure improved teacher practice. Teachers complete a professional learning plan to set professional goals and to log their efforts to meet those goals.  We maintain a safe, nurturing and professional environment where teachers are appreciated and celebrated. Word of mouth and our reputation in the community has allowed us to recruit highly qualified staff members. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 1  Several strategies have been put in place to ensure that we provide high-quality professional development for our pedagogy:  High quality ongoing professional development to improve teacher practice (focused on the Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for Teaching Rubric) and student outcomes is provided for our teachers, the principal and our paraprofessionals by our core curriculum providers, the principal, Field Support Center Specialists, online webinar courses and our teachers throughout the year – which are offered on a monthly basis.  Our teachers engage in inquiry and teacher teamwork to ensure that our students are meeting and exceeding Common Core Learning Standards  Teachers develop personal professional learning goals each year that are monitored by administrators during our middle of the year and end of the year one-on-one data meetings.  Differentiated professional development opportunities will be provided to nurture and support growth. Inter-visitations and Instructional Rounds with administrators allow teachers to observe best/promising  practices. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.).  Literacy and math development starts early in life and is highly correlated with school achievement. The fundamentals for a successful early reader, both cognitive and language skills are learned before children reach school age. Our Pre-K instructional program is aligned to the Pre-K Common Core Learning Standards. Our program nurtures each child’s learning experiences to provide the foundational literacy, math and social skills that prepare them to enter kindergarten and subsequently enhance school readiness. It allows our teachers to teach and assess early reading and math skills to identify and meet student needs at an early age. In addition, our early childhood teachers attend the same workshops as all other teachers to stay abreast of current trends and practices in the field. 2   Our Pre-K teachers attend at least three Pre-K workshops each year to develop skills and strategies to assist students with developing social-emotional competence. Teachers administer pre-K assessments that yield developmentally appropriate data in seven competencies that is shared with parents. Parents are then provided with strategies to reinforce strategies at home to ensure they are kindergarten ready. This data is also used to determine if students are in need of intervention services.  Our Parent Coordinator conducts workshops to share developmentally appropriate behaviors throughout the school year. Our social worker conducts a "Getting Ready for Kindergarten" Workshop for parents each year during the month of May. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Assessment data is gathered and is disaggregated and organized by the Data Specialist to be reported in a way that makes sense to educators and the school community at large. Because the ELA and Math State Assessments provide only summative data, we analyze Fountas & Pinnell results and the Primary Literacy Assessment to diagnose our students’ strengths and weaknesses in pre-reading skills, including, phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, fluency and comprehension. Based on the limited data provided, it is important to utilize a set of interim assessments that will be administered throughout the school year to prepare students for New York City and State Assessments and to ensure that they are able to meet and exceed Common Core Learning Standards. In addition to ELA and Math benchmark assessments, we utilize NYC Performance Tasks to familiarize grades 3-5 students with the format, language, and timing of state assessments. The data specialist gathers ELA and math data and creates spreadsheets and conducts data analysis professional learnings to support our vertical and inquiry teams. After the teacher teams have first analyzed the data, the critical piece is for us to model the importance of data analysis and engage all staff in the process. The goal is to have teachers owning the data and making the instructional changes needed for improved student achievement which are far greater when they are involved in the process. Teacher teams drill down into the data to gain a deeper understanding about our students’ needs. In our discussion about the assessment data, we engage in collaborative problem solving. An abridged list of essential questions are as follows: What are the patterns/trends - in general? Among subgroups? Are there obvious gaps in performance between groups of students? If so, what are the areas? Do the data indicate what strategies or specific interventions should be taken? What does the data tell us about the need for professional development? After analyzing the data, we create an intervention plan for each student and allocate resources (instructional materials) to meet the needs of that student. Along with creating the plan will be setting SMART goals and developing the evaluation. The questions to be answered are: What specific actions will we take to achieve this improvement goal based on best practices? How will we know if our strategies are successful? What evidence will we have to show the success of our action? Next, we implement the plan. Included in this step will be looking at teacher and student work. Finally, we monitor and revise (where necessary). Furthermore, the Professional Learning Committee meet quarterly (or on an as needs 3  basis) to discuss teacher inquiries to strengthen areas for professional learnings and to revise the Professional Learning Plan as needed. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 204,721.00 0 12,366.00 0 2,404,386.00 x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 4  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S.273Q, in compliance with Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S.273Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; and  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality 6  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Quality Review Report, NYC School Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; and translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help.    The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 7   encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; and  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 273Q, in compliance with Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Our responsibility is to provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas; and  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships We support home-school relationships and improve communication by:     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; and 8   ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. We provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; and  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. We provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; and advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs;  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to  learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; and 9   share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Our Student Responsibilities include: III. Student Responsibilities       attending school regularly and arrive on time; completing my homework and submit all assignments on time; following the school rules and be responsible for my actions; showing respect for myself, other people and property; trying to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; and always trying my best to learn. 0  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 30 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Public School 273's instructional program is aligned with the New York City's Department of Education's 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools. Our philosophy centers around the belief that all students will upon graduation from high school be college and career ready. This belief includes all students, including English Language Learners. PS 273 will utilize a supplemental ENL program that will run after- school to service the needs of our students. The focus and rationale of the program centers around preparing our ELLs to score at a Level 3 or 4 on the ELA and Mathematics State Exams and Common Core Assessments in 2017. Based on our 2017-2018 ELA State Assessment data, the results revealed that our ELL students increased 9.1 percentage points in students scoring levels 3 and 4 in comparison to our 2014-2015 results. Our 2017-2018 Math State Assessment data revealed that our ELL students increased 2.5 percentage points in students scoring levels 3 and 4 in comparison to our 2016-2017 results. While we are proud of these gains, we would like to do more to support language acquisition, comprehension and writing for our ELL students. We will continue to utilize assessment data to identify the specific skills to target areas of strength and need in literacy for reading and written expression, particularly in math, Fountas and Pinnell, including ELA and Math State Assessments. We will utilize a co-teaching model with a certified ENL teacher and seven common branch/elementary education certified teachers for our supplemental after-school program. We will use rotating groups to ensure that all students in the supplemental program receive appropriate English language development support from a certified ENL teacher each time the program meets. To strengthen word knowledge, for materials, we will utilize "Journey's Vocabulary," which is a comprehensive English language development program. This program focuses on academic language and vocabulary development; thematic, content-based instruction; differentiated instruction for language and literacy; and a daily instructional routine in oral language, reading, and writing. The supplemental program will service ELL students in grades 2-5 from 2:30 to 3:30 PM on Wednesdays and Thursdays. This program will focus on our English Language Learners in grades 2-5. We will also support the English Language Learners in other grades as they too need to be college and career ready. Students will work in instructional groups based on their academic language and instructional levels to ensure that they receive appropriate support from the certified ENL teacher. Student records of attendance and assessment data will be maintained in Room 408. Parent notifications will be issued according to the choice indicated on the Home Language Survey. All pertinent documents, including letters to parents, will be kept on file in Room 408. 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Engaging online and digital tools motivate English Language Learners. We plan to integrate Starfall and Imagine Learning English, which are engaging and motivational tools for ELL children. Starfall and Imagine Learning English ensures that children are actively involved and guided to direct their own learning. They learn to observe, question, imitate, examine, explore, investigate and discover. These are skills that are part of the Common Core Learning Standards. Imagine Learning English is especially beneficial for English language learners since students support and learn alongside their peers and gain valuable academic and language skills that our ELLs need to acquire. Supplemental support will be given in a small-group setting to provide greater individualized attention and greater support. The small-group setting will target the skills that every student needs. While the start date for the program will be December 5, 2018, we anticipate the end date for the program will be March 28, 2019. The language of instruction will be in English. Our ENL teacher is fully NY State certified in ESL. We plan to include additional content-area teachers who are certified in elementary education to co-teach the program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our June 2017 Professional Needs Survey revealed that teachers identified ELL strategies as a high need, making the top 12 among 50 suggested topics for professional growth. Although our percentage of ELL students is 11%, 74% of our students are English language learners. Incorporating ELL strategies into each lesson is key to meeting the needs of our students. Teachers have the opportunity to attend of professional learning opportunities each month with our ENL teacher. Teachers who have been selected to teach during the after school program will receive additional training tailored to the supplemental materials on November 26, 2018. Teachers will meet at least one hour each week to plan and adjust their lesson plans based on data. Our school is providing all teachers with professional development training. The duration of the program will be from November 2018 through May 2019. Agendas and attendance sheets will be stored in the main office where our ELL files are maintained. Our ENL teacher/ENL coordinator, Ms. Renee Palermo, is scheduled to facilitate all professional learnings. The areas of training will be around ensuring that all ELLs have access to the Common Core Learning Standards. A focus of the training sessions will be to work with general education teachers around the use of the supplemental materials and to strengthen their use of the SIOP (Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol and TPR (Total Physical Response) strategies. We want teachers to implement strategies to support student academic success and language development. Teachers will learn to integrate SIOP strategies into their lesson plans. We anticipate that these strategies will result in greater student performance on the State Common Core assessments. Topics include: Series on SIOP methodologies; Scaffolded lesson planning; and Supports for ELLs and text complexity 3  Part C: Professional Development Scheduled Dates: Oct. 1, Oct. 15, Nov. 5, Nov. 19, Feb. 4, Feb. 25; Session times are 3:10 p.m. -4:24 p.m. There will be additional professional learning sessions during non-attendance days and "Marvelous Monday PDs. Six workshops have been schedule. All records of professional learnings, including agendas and sign in sheets will be kept in a file in Room 408. Providing teachers with Professional Development will support teachers with implementing various research based ELL strategies that targets students' proficiency levels (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding). This will consequently improve student outcomes by moving them along the success continuum. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Research denotes the importance of parental involvement and its effect on significantly improved language skills, test performance, and school behavior, as well as the general educational process. To help students gain exposure to real world experiences, parents will be invited to attend all school trips and attend our monthly school cultural events. Our parents' interest in high quality education is the critical factor in the impact of the school environment on the achievement and educational aspirations of our students. The Parent Coordinator will conduct a series of workshops entitled English Learning Circles. The workshop will take place as follows: Tuesdays and Thursdays from 8:30 a.m. -10:30 a.m.: Week One: 1/8/19 & 1/10/19 Week Two: 1/15/19 & 1/17/19 Week Three: 1/22/19 & 1/24/19 Week Four: 1/29/19 & 1/31/19 Week Five: 2/5/19 & 2/7/19 This 10-session, two-hour course will serve to create a more welcoming school environment for parents; empower parents to work with the principal and their child’s teacher to promote student success, address parent issues and concerns at the school; and strengthen parent involvement in their children’s education. Staff members will conduct Computer Assisted Workshops to familiarize parents with strategies and tips to support their children at home. Parents will be notified through letters, flyers and phone calls (when necessary). All records, including invites, agendas, and sign in sheets will be kept in a file in Room 408. 4 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name P.S. 273 Borough Queens School Number 273 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Brenda Ward Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Renee Palermo Teacher/Subject Area Katie Ulrich/Special Educatio Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Rodriguez Related-Service Provider Stephanie Laraque Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal Bibi Rahamatulla Coach N/A School Counselor Lisa Williams Parent Alexandra Heras Parent Coordinator Vernessa Brathwaite Field Support Center Staff Member Pierre Galvez Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 6  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 341 Total number of ELLs 50 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.66% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use the Performance Literacy Assessment (PLA ), ReadyGen, GoMath, Base-Mid-End Line Assessments, Writing Samples, New York City Performance Task (NYCPT) beginning and end of the year assessments, and the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments. Our ELLs need extra support. The ENL teacher has incorporated guided mini lessons into her stand-alone program and teachers have included more independent reading time into the reading block. Our school has adopted the TC Writing Program in the classrooms to expand students' writing skills and grammar in alignment to the CCLS for language, speaking and listening. Benchmark data and end of unit data, along with running records and information from individual teacher/students are used to plan and adjust instruction to meet students' needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 7  Each grade has at least two common preparation periods per week to analyze the data and plan common instructional moves to impact student outcomes. Planning time has also been allotted during Monday Professional Learning sessions for grade teams and vertical teams to work together to develop ELL strategies to incorporate in lesson plans. In addition, each class has an intervention period each day. During this period students work in small groups with the classroom teacher and on online programs (Imagine Learning English, COMPASS, ST Math) designed to target their learning needs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Students in grades K-5 are assessed using the following: Fountas and Pinnell, the Primary Literacy Assessment, GoMath, and our Schoolwide Writing Prompt. These beginning, middle and end of the year assessments provide valuable information regarding our students' progress over time. In addition, the success of the ELL program is evaluated through the NYSESLAT data, classroom assessments, informal anecdotal records, NYC Performance Tasks, and formal assessments. The student's individual success in all content areas is monitored through progress reports, running records, and informal assessments from the ENL instructor. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers use the RTI process, ENL students are also offered Fall and Spring after school to support small group instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We use ReadyGen and GoMath benchmark assessments for all children. We incorporate the recommended ELL support strategies that are embedded in the program. If after analyzing the benchmark assessments, students are not progressing at the desired rate, then we provide Tier II intervention at a student ratio of 10:1. Progress is determined whether students are benefiting from an instructional program within a reasonable time. If students continue to show low academic achievement they are identified for Tier III intervention using Great Leaps and a ratio of 1:1 intense intervention. Teachers also use Max Scholar online program which uses the Orton Gillingham approach. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The results of the NYSESLAT reveal that students are in need of extra support in the areas of Reading and Writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Students are pulled out for small group instruction. Data specialist shares information with the school. Principal conducts data meetings with teachers to monitor and regroup students as needed to provide support. The RTI team meets monthly to discuss the progress of tier II and tier III students. Students are re-evaluated every 4-6 weeks, if changes are recommended they will be implemented moving forward to support and improve the academic success of our ELL population. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a.The school currently uses the standalone/integrated organizational models for ENL; as well as Co-Teaching and Collaborative teaching. During the standalone model, students travel in groups, according to their proficiency levels, for instruction in a separate location. 8  b. During the integrated model, the ENL teacher works with ELLs during literacy and math, and content instruction, in collaboration with the general education classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. The ENL teacher plans during common prep time with classroom teachers to address the needs of ELLs. Students work in pairs based on language proficiency, and during small groups, the ENL teacher emphasizes the same strategies that are being taught in the classroom. ENL strategies such as total physical response, and whole language are used to help children gain both fluency and comprehension in the English language. In conjunction with helping the advancement of the children's oral expression, the teacher often reads aloud to the students and gives them opportunities to respond to literature though writing and drawing. Students' native language is used as an asset. During standalone ENL, students are grouped homogeneously according to level or need for English-acquisition-focused instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teacher provides services for Entering and Low Emerging ELL students for 8 periods per week at 45 minutes per period for a total of 360 minutes per week. The break down is as follows: 180 minutes of ENL instruction and 180 minutes of ELA instruction. The Transitional and Expanding ELL students are serviced for 4 periods per week at 45 minutes per period for a total of 180 minutes per week. The break down is as follows: 90 minutes in ENL / ELA instruction and 90 minutes of content instruction. Students who are commanding receive 90 minutes in ELA / content instruction. Students with IEPs are included in the breakdown provided above. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In literacy, math, social studies, and science, vocabulary development is a major focus. All ELL students' mandated minutes are divided equally between stand-alone and integrated instruction. Dependent upon the content area in which the ENL teacher pushes in, the students are supported as they breakdown the actual language of the given text, activity or task of the day and begin with vocabulary and visual arts. Also, ELLs are given an opportunity to participate in peer tutoring within the classroom. Beginners team up with more advanced ELLs to exchange ideas and reach an understanding of the concept(s) taught. Math manipulatives such as counters, chips, and interactive technology programs are readily available and often used in every content area. Whenever possible, demonstrations of the lesson help ELLs understand and participate in group discussions, eventually guiding them into broader, whole class discussions and accountable talk, where ELLs can move around and interact with other students. The ENL teacher also uses the instructional moves to support the ELL population instructional strategies and methods such as movement, music, technology, drama, and TPR to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standard. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students taking the New York State Exam are given the document in their native language as a support tool. If a student is unable to complete the NYSITELL he/she is given the Spanish Lab. The Lab is available for our Spanish speaking students. When necessary a Spanish speaking translator is provided. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. Long Term 9  e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status ReadyGen and GoMath provides differentiated instruction for ELLs. Additional strategies are found in the supplemental handbook resource guides for teachers. Long-term ELLs continue to receive Tier II instruction up to two years or as long as needed. Former ELLs will receive services for 2 years after reaching the proficient/commanding level. a. When a SIFE student returns to school they are given a brief informal assessment of their basic skills and knowledge of English. The student is reintroduced to the classroom environment through displaying language and content objectives and present information in varied ways including written demonstrations and manipulatives. Once the student feels comfortable in their classroom environment, they folllow the structured ELL program that is currently in place. If there is a need for extra tutoring, the ENL teacher meets with the classroom teacher and discusses areas for improvement and possible intervention strategies to meet their needs. SIFE students also receive extended instructional time in small groups during the Extended Intervention period four days a week. b. The main focus is to scaffold support so that the student can experience a smooth transition back into the classroom environment, develop their basic English, vocabulary and beginning foundations with their content area teacher and ENL teacher. The program is adapted to address student needs. Focus is placed on utilizing the skills acquired in their first year to develop stronger abilities as a reader and writer of English. c. ELL students receiving services 4 to 6 years will receive extensive academic support in reading, writing and math. The AIS teachers will provide extra support in content area instruction and supplemental support with a reduced student to teacher ratio during the extended day program. d. Because we are a K-5 school, we will not have long-term ELLs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? There are a variety of strategies used to accelerate English language development. The ENL teacher provides extra support using visuals, Total Physical Response (TPR), Kinesthetic learning, and the Sheltered Instructional Observation Protocal (SIOP) Method. Age appropriate materials from the ESL teacher as well as the school library are available for planning and instruction lessons aligned to CCLS. All teachers will be trained in using the Universal Design Language model and the instructional moves that form a robust instruction, as well as the use of ENL strategies to incorporate in planning lessons. All classroom teachers will also incorporate accountable talk, technology, and will utilize the following intervention programs: Fundations, Elements of Vocabulary, Fountas and Pinnel Intervention System to support student needs. ENL students use the technology program Imagine Learning for additional support. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ELL-SWDs are maintstreamed during standalone sessions. Differentiation of resources, process (with reduced time on task) and product are incorporated into lessons to meet their needs . The kinesthetic, tactile and the arts are infused into our lessons as well. We support our ELLS - SWD by using flexible scheduling, and standalone/integrated models. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our online Math programs are ST Math, Compass Learning, and Max Scholar. Each program provides an initial diagnostic of our targeted ELL students. These programs places each child on an individual learning path and tracks their progress to strengthen their skills. Students use these programs during small group and individual instruction time. They can also access these programs at home. Our social studies and science programs are integrated into the literacy block. Students can access science and social studies content information through Pebble Go and Pebble Now online programs. These programs offer audio and pictures to support comprehension and vocabulary development. Vocabulary support and pre-teaching is provided by the ENL teacher. In addition, our ENL teacher provides standalone/integrated services to address student needs in the content areas. Classroom teachers provide supplemental math support using "Rhymes and Times" to build math vocabulary and fluency. Visuals are also used when needed along with manipulatives to support students in grasping concepts in the content area. Technology is used to help reinforce and practice concepts. We also incorporate Imagine Learning English, Compass Learning, Max Scholar and Great Leaps to increase reading ability and fluency. 0  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the year 2017-2019, we will be implementing several online student programs to support student achievement. Namely Compass Learning, Max Scholar, Imagine Learning English and ST Math. There will be an after-school program that will provide additional help in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in English. Parent workshops will be held to help ELL parents support their children in their academic growth. Adult ESL classes will be held periodically to enable parents to learn about and utilize strategies to help their children at home. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently there are no programs that will be cancelled. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are provided with music, drama, dance, art, physical education, technology, and academic support during the day through an intervention/enrichment period. All ELL students are programmed for these courses and are encouraged to participate in all school-wide programs during and after school. Students are provided with Fall and Spring ENL after school and Morning Tech Club support. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We are currently using ReadyGen and GoMath along with FOSS, Harcourt science and social studies, Fundations, Jolly Phonics, Elements of Vocabulary, Rhymes and Times, Compass Learning, Orton Gllingham's Max Scholar, Imagine Learning English, and Thinking Maps. Each of these programs come with tiered support which will benefit our ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Although the primary language spoken in ENL is English, the students receive and also use books on tape, literature in their native language, and interactive English/Spanish books. Students and staff support non-English speaking students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Based on beginning, middle, and end of the year data, ELL students are grouped according to age to address their social and emotional needs. ELL students are grouped both homogeneously and heterogeneously according to their grade level skills, and CCLS to address their academic needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are currently using ReadyGen and GoMath along with FOSS, Harcourt science and Passport Social Studies, Fundations, Jolly Phonics, Elements of Vocabulary, Rhymes and Times, Starfall, Imagine Learning English, and Thinking Maps. Each of these programs come with tiered support which will benefit our ELLs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Each year, a parent and student orientation and open house is scheduled for newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year. In the beginning of the school year and when necessary, all parents of ELL students meet with the ENL teacher and are introduced to the staff and take a tour of the school. Workshops, Cookshop, and parent engagement PD's are also given to parents of ELLs for support. These activities are conducted by the ENL teacher, support staff, and parent coordinator. ELL students are included in all school activities and after school programs. When needed the school counselor will assist if a student demonstrates anxiety. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? n/a 1  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All classroom teachers (including the ENL and Art teachers) at P.S.273 will participate in monthly professional development workshops which include the following topics: Instructional moves to support ELL students, Danielson Framework For Teaching Rubric, Common Core Learning Standards (ELA & Math), Professional Teaching Standards, Universal Design for Learning, Data Analysis, The Inquiry Process/Looking at Student Work, and Depth of Knowledge. Teachers meet monthly and discuss a variety of instructional strategies that support all students including English Language Learners. The principal and ENL teacher attends monthly professional development meetings provided by the Regional Field Support Center that focus on teacher effectiveness and quality instruction. We also have ENL bookclubs which meet after school on a monthly basis. Our school secretary continues to receive training from the District on the ATS system which is then turn-keyed to the ENL teacher. In addition to professional development workshops and grade team meetings that will be held, our ENL teacher meets with teachers twice each semester to focus on topics such as the NYSESLAT preparation to help teachers become familiar with the format and skills needed for students to be successful on this assessment, supplemental ENL strategies and lesson activities. Also the ENL teacher is part of the instructional cabinet, RTI, Special Needs Inquiry Team and attends monthly ELL network meetings. Teachers will also engage in Inquiry Work to analyze data from our ELL subgroups to determine their progress along the CCLS continuum. Teachers will receive professional development based on the formative assessments to move students along the CCLS continuum to ensure students are meeting and exceeding grade level standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The guidance counselor will provide staff with the professional development and resources to assist ELLs as they transition into middle school. She will also coordinate the Middle School Choice process. The guidance counselor will conduct information meetings with both the students and parents separately to share information. Translation will be provided as needed. The Regional Field Support Center and District 27 will provide professional development to support the guidance counselor. The guidance counselor will turn-key all information. During grade team meetings each month, as well as Professional development sessions on Mondays, strategies will be shared by the ENL teacher to address topics including interpreting NYSESLAT data, literacy, math, and writing based on informal and formal assessments. Teachers and Paraprofessionals can also access additional information from the Master Teacher/ParaEducator on-line professional development program to learn more strategies to support ELLS. A record of teachers/paraprofessionals' participation/attendance will be maintained in main office. 2  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During Parent Engagement Time and Parent Teacher Conferences teachers meet with parents to discuss goals, language development, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs in content areas. Assessments and progress is shared with parents during these meetings parent workshops are also held to share information and strategies with parents of ELLs to support their children at home. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are encouraged to participate in our monthly home-school projects, monthly events, as well as our community service projects, trips, Guest Reader Fridays, cultural celebrations and other parents volunteer opportunities. The parent coordinator conducts Cookshop, teachers provide professional development to parents, enabling them to assist with special projects. Parents are also invited to share their language and culture during school activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Brenda Ward, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 273 School DBN: 27Q273 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Brenda Ward Title Principal Bibi Rahamatulla Assistant Principal Vanessa Brathwaite Parent Coordinator Renee Palermo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Alexandra Heras Parent Jennifer Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area Katie Ulrich Teacher/Subject Area Lisa Williams Mary Barton Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Stephanie Laraque Other Related Services Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/28/17 9/27/17 9/27/17 9/27/17 9/27/17 9/27/17 9/27/17 9/27/17 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q273 School Name: P.S. 273 Superintendent: Jennifer Ambert The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Vernessa Brathwaite Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 273 uses the information provided by families on the Home Language Survey and on the emergency contact cards to assess our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs. We have found that approximately 55 percent of our parents are Spanish speaking. Of the 55 percent, approximately 40 percent require written and oral Spanish translation. There are two parents who require oral and written Urdu translation and two parents who require translation in Bengali. We have one family who requires translation in Chinese as well. This information is maintained in the main office. At the beginning of the school year, teachers are given a list of the parents who prefer written or oral communication in a home language other than English, based on the data supplied by the school secretary. Furthermore, teachers then conduct a brief interview with each parent to confirm their preferred language of communication. This list of parents and their preferred languages is compiled by class and is posted in the main office and a copy is forwarded to the classroom teacher to ensure that we provide the preferred oral and written communication to our parents. Oral Interpretations and written translators are provided for non-English speaking parents using DOE resources. Teachers are given access to Over-the-Phone services, where a Language phone-line is made available and an over-the-phone interpreter can be accessed. We 6  also have staff members (school secretary, paraprofessionals and school aides) who are able to translate the following languages, if necessary: Spanish, Bengali, Urdu, Arabic, Hindi and Punjabi. We also use parent-volunteers. When necessary, we use the Office of Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Bengali Punjabi Chinese Hindi 156 220 5 6 4 2 39.69 55.98 1.27 1.53 1.02 .51 157 219 5 6 1 2 39.95 55.73 1.27 1.53 .25 .51 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families The Welcome Letters; the Family Hand-Book; September 2018 Monthly Newsletters; letters September 2018-June 2019 Event fliers September 2018 - June 2019 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translation and Interpretation Unit, staff members (including our school secretary), and The Big Word to assist in the translation of documents. We utilize our school staff, DOE resources, Goggle Translate, The Big Word and the Translation and Interpretation Unit to assist in the translation of documents. We utilize our school staff, DOE resources, Goggle Translate, The Big Word and the Translation and 7  Interpretation Unit to assist in the translation of documents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? During P.S. 273's school events, bilingual school staff and parent-volunteers will often assist with translation. During the 2016-2017 school year, P.S. 273 purchased a translation equipment that comprises of head-sets, body-transmitters and speakers. A bilingual school staff or parent will interpret and only those parents who need interpretation will have access to the headsets and body transmitters. Our translation equipment is most efficient during large face-face meeting events, such as parent Orientations, Curriculum Night, etc. During individual, face to face parent meetings , school staff is given access to the equipment. In addition, we will utilize over-the-phone interpretation from the Translation Unit for non-covered languages. Bilingual school staff and parent-volunteers assist with translation. For non-cover languages, we will utilize over-the-phone interpretation from the Translation Unit when necessary. Bilingual school staff and parent-volunteers assist with translation. For non-cover languages, we will utilize over-the-phone interpretation from the Translation Unit when necessary. Curriculum-Meet the Teacher Night/ September 2018 Parent-Teacher Conference November 2018 March 2019 May 2019 September 2018 June 2019 Parent Teacher Conferences/Student Led Conferences Parent Orientation 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 8  In the event of an emergency, P.S. 273's strategy to reach limited-English-proficient families consists of a phone-blast to parents in various languages, using bilingual school staff to assist in translations and interpretations. Also, individual calls to parents with limited-English proficiency are also done to ensure that our limited-English proficient families have been reached and contacted. Bilingual school staff and parent volunteers are utilized in these cases as well. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the beginning of the school year, during the month of September, the Language Access Coordinator will meet with all school staff to go over the Chancellor's Regulation A-663. Any questions or concerns about the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 will be addressed. A copy of the Chancellor's Regulations A-663 will be made available to all school staff as well. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) To fulfill the parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, in addition to posting the information indicated on the checklist listed above in prominent locations, this information will be shared with parents during all parent meetings held in September (i.e., Parent Association, Curriculum /Meet the Teacher Night/Parent Engagement Meetings with teachers) and on an as needs basis. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Each year we solicit feedback from parents on the quality of our services via parent surveys twice a year (November and May). Included in the survey are questions related to their satisfaction with the translation and interpretation services provided. 9 
