 75Q277 School Name: THE RIVERVIEW SCHOOL Principal: ANNETTE BEALE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Riverview School 307500014277 K-12 1-50 51 st Avenue, LIC, NY 11101 718-609-3320 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 75Q277 718-609-3322 Fax: Annette Beale abeale@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Annette Beale PascualLleras Laura Lynch Angela Pomo N/A N/A N/A N/A Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Ketler Louissaint Superintendent: 400 First Ave, NY, NY 10010 KLouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1501 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   District 75 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Dr. Jude Arthur Executive Director: 400 1st Ave NY NY 10010 jarthur2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1500 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Annette Beale Pascual Lleras Laura Lynch Darlene Matusiak N/A N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Heather Sciacca Ingrid Caicedo-Guzman Maria Aguilero Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent   Angela Pomo Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/ Assistant Principal Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Vision Statement: We, The Riverview School, believe that individuals with all abilities can reach their fullest potential when in a positive, safe, nurturing, and collaborative environment. Our goal is to help empower individuals to develop the necessary skills to become independent citizens who solve problems and express their needs and feelings appropriately to meet the challenges of education, work, and life. Mission Statement: As a community, we create an atmosphere of high expectations that fosters independent and expressive individuals. Through engaging and individualized instruction that both incorporates student's interests and   individualized levels of access, students are challenged with a curriculum anchored in the 21st century skills of collaboration, critical thinking, problem solving, and creativity, as a appropriate for student populations. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 277Q, The Riverview School, is a District 75 Special Education Organization. The Riverview Organization opened in September 2013. The organization began with two co-located sites in newly constructed buildings located in Long Island City, Queens. The school has expanded to nine co-located sites throughout Queens in the neighborhoods of Ridgewood, Woodside, Astoria, Corona and Jamaica. The Riverview School continues to service students in grades K-12. All of 277Q’s students have an Individualized Education Program (IEP) and range in classification of abilities. Presently, the school has a total population of 403 students, and will be adding 2 new sites, with a total of 9 new classes in the 2018-2019 school year, including two inclusion classes. 77% of our students are male and 23% female. 40% of our students are Hispanic, 19% white, 18% Asian, 17% African American, 2% multi-racial, 2% American Indian/Alaskan, 1% Hawaiian/Pacific Islander. 40% of our students are English Language Learners. The following languages are spoken in the homes of the students at PS 277Q: Bengali, Arabic, Punjabi, Romanian, Mandarin, Nepalese, Swedish, Urdu, Russian, Italian, Korean, Gujarti, Serbo-Croatian, Burmese, Tagalog, Cantonese and Spanish. In partnership with parents, co-located schools, and community organizations, we provide students with opportunities to take part in community jobs, programs, and projects. Together, we create an atmosphere in which each student is expected to reach the highest level of their abilities and is supported in doing so through a variety of pedagogical strategies and targeted curriculum selections and adaptations. Our Acronym, R.I.V.E.R., is the foundation of our school and stands for respect, independence, voice, empathy and responsibility. R.I.V.E.R. encompasses the core beliefs of our organization and guides the choices we make. Our 277Q Organization has developed the following partnerships and initiatives: Collaborative School Community Initiative- In the 2018-19 school year, we will be expanding our inclusion program further in our elementary school and adding an inclusion high school program at a new site in Astoria, Queens to extend our work as a part of the Collaborative School Community initiative. This year, we had tremendous success in partnering with PS 290 and Teacher’s College Inclusive Classrooms Project to support the seamless integration of our District 75 students into PS 290’s music and library programs and have developed cycles of professional development and intervisitation to ensure both school’s staff and families are prepared to plan universally designed instruction to meet the needs of all students in the upcoming year. Peer Buddy Programs- Hunters Point Community Middle School worked with our SETTS Teachers to create a buddy program for the HPCMS students and our D75 Riverview Students. HPCMS Students are paired with one of our D75 Riverview students and they meet during lunch period two times per week. The HPCMS students were provided training from our Riverview OT, SETTS Provider and paraprofessionals on the various disabilities and behaviors our D75 students’ display. Both groups of students have learned invaluable lessons including social skills, awareness of disabilities as well as diversity. In addition to the above program, our ENL teachers have collaborated to create a buddy program between our 311 middle school students and our 315 elementary school students. Our middle school students select text based on our current Unit of Study, preview and plan discussion points for the younger students and travel each week to work with those students on reading comprehension. We intend to expand this program to 404/78 in the upcoming school year. Rethink : During the 2017-2018 school year, we have partnered with Rethink to consult with our teachers on utilizing Applied Behavioral Analysis Principals throughout their day in our 6:1:1 classrooms. All 6:1:1 teachers attended multiple workshops on utilizing the training and resources, and applying it to their teaching practice. Rethink coaches have also designed staff specific as-needed half day and full-day professional development for 277Q staff multiple 0  times throughout the year shared during in-service days and Monday afternoon professional development time. This included personal in-class coaches visits to each classroom throughout the year. During the 2018-2019 we will continue our partnership with Rethink to include a Social Emotional Literacy component, as well as training for new paraprofessionals. Get Ready To Learn ( GRTL - Anne Buckley Reen)– All 6:1:1 classrooms across the many 277Q sites participate in Get Ready to Learn. Schedules are created with time in place to allow for daily participation in the program. A GRTL facilitator from 277Q participates in all District-wide meetings and shares data and information from 277Q classrooms as well as brings information back to the sites from the program meetings. Parent-to-Parent - During the 2015-2016 school year, our parent coordinator formed a partnership with the non-profit organization to support parents in acquiring services. We will continue to work with Parent-to-Parent by bringing them into the school to assist in parent training sessions and support parents in navigating OPWDD to receive services for families and students. Remind App- This year, our parent coordinator has successfully implemented use of the Remind phone app to communicate with families on upcoming events and important dates. We have received positive feedback from families and will continue to expand it’s use in the upcoming school year. Brainpower- Teachers in our 12:1:1 program have been working with a staff developer from Brainpower throughout the 2017-2018 to integrate this program throughout their day. Brainpower is a mindfulness program to support teachers and students in focus and attentiveness. Brainpower coaches are brought in to support staff by conducting after school professional development as well as in-class coach visits to hone teacher understanding of student emotional well-being. Carbone Clinic: During the 2018-2019 school year, we will be partnering with the Carbone Clinic to support a Verbal Behavior program to our elementary site at 315. The Carbone coaches will be providing full day support 1x a month for teachers and paraprofessionals in using evidence based practices in Applied Behavioral Analysis. Instructional Focus: P277Q students will increase their mathematical awareness, understanding and skills as a result of engagement in high-quality mathematical routines embedded across content areas and classrooms throughout the school day. As a result of teacher collaborative analysis of math data and student work, teachers will refine their mathematical practices that include targeted and embedded math routines throughout the school day. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Student Population and Specific Needs: As a District 75 school, The Riverview School services students in grades K-12. All of 277Q’s students have an Individualized Education Program (IEP) and range in classification and abilities. We serve students in 6:1:1, 8:1:1, 12:1:1 and inclusion classrooms. Additionally, we have a large ENL population, at 40%. At the Riverview School we provide educational, vocational, and behavioral support programs for students who are on the autism spectrum, have significant cognitive delays, are emotionally challenged, sensory impaired and/or multiply disabled. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The Elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which the Riverview School has made the most progress over the past year: 1  Rigorous Instruction – Because 277Q curricula and tasks are planned and refined through common planning and collaboration and aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards, our students have been extremely successful on state and local assessments. The school’s instructional decisions result in coherence across grades and subject areas and promote career readiness for all learners. Across grades and content areas, individual and groups of students, including English language learners and students with disabilities, have access to the curricula and tasks and are cognitively engaging. We continue to customize curriculum to motivate students by incorporating their interests and creating opportunities for ambitious intellectual activity in every classroom. As a result of this work, our students increased an average of 20% in each standard assessed in FAST. Our highest performing standard was RI.1 and our lowest performing, which still showed 19% growth, was Operations and Algebraic Thinking. In SANDI, we made 5%-6% growth in each area, with communication development being our highest scoring component (56%) and math being our lowest (35%). Strong Community Family Ties – This was previously an area of focus for us, as it was identified in our 2014-15 Quality Review Report. As stated in our report, “School leaders and staff consistently communicate expectations that are connected to a path to college and career readiness to families. Teacher teams and staff establish a culture that consistently communicates high expectations for all learners. However, successful partnerships with families are not yet fully established. “ While we will continue to deepen our work with families and the community, we have made tremendous progress in this area of the framework. We have hired a parent coordinator (2015-16) who is now planning and implementing monthly workshops for families. Additionally, we allocated our budget in 2017-18 to include a transition coordinator who is able to communicate with families about the preparation required as their children enter adulthood. In the upcoming school year, he will be supporting our elementary school sites in developing more routinized systems for classroom jobs (pre-vocational). As a result of these changes in 2017-2018 we have had 46 school events (workshops, student performances, PTA sponsored events) , with an average attendance of 48 family members per event. We will continue to improve these outcomes through increased number and diversity of resources made available in the upcoming school year. Our PA has become more deeply established in the 2017-18 school year and they successfully planned and implemented a workshop on autism awareness for families of both 277Q and PS 290. We had an equal number of families from each school and will continue to plan collaboratively with the general education PTA’s in the upcoming year. During the 2017-2018 school year the PTA created a facebook community to connect with other parents across all the sites. School Leadership-This year, we welcomed a new assistant principal, Mitchell Glover to the organization. Throughout the year, the administrative cabinet met regularly to discuss observation data and to create a cohesive plan for the 2018-19 year. Structured teaching has anchored instruction in this organization and has impacted both student learning and teacher effectiveness outcomes tremendously. Throughout the year, we worked with district coaches from all departments to deepen our understanding of alternative curricula and instructional strategies available to our school and developed a curriculum design team to re-write our ELA Units of Study to apply this and to include more rigorous opportunities for students. Additionally, we opted-in to the Common Core Curricula to ensure our teachers have diversity in the choices of programs to utilize in their classrooms. As a result, we expect to see increased outcomes for students in all standards assessed in FAST and to see improved outcomes for teachers in the area of using assessment in instruction. Key Areas of Focus Mathematical Awareness – According to 277Q's 2017-2018 SANDI and FAST , math is our lowest scoring area for our students. In SANDI our students scored 35%, and in FAST measurement and data they scored 64%. In the 2018-2019 school year 277Q students will increase their mathematical awareness, understanding and skills as a result of engagement in high-quality mathematical routines embedded across content areas and classrooms throughout the 2  school day. As a result of teacher collaborative analysis of math data and student work, teachers will refine their mathematical practices that include targeted and embedded math routines throughout the school day. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75Q277 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 403 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 78.0% % Attendance Rate 76.4% % Reduced Lunch 42.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 40.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 14.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 32% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 0.0% 0.7% 99.8% 17.9% 25.1% 1.7% 4 19% 6.1 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Students at 277Q made tremendous gains in all academic areas as evidenced by the FAST data. As stated above, we made an average of 20% growth across all standards assessed in FAST, from Fall 2017 to Spring 2018 which is a greater increase than that of the 2016-2017 school year. In SANDI, we made gains of 5%-6% across assessed subjects. While we showed growth in all areas, we have identified math as a low performing area in our SANDI assessment (35%). Measurement and Data is an area of deficit for our students across all sites. For the upcoming year, we will be utilizing EQUALS and GoMath math curriculums, and having our students engage in high-quality embedded math routines throughout the day. Teacher teams have adapted the curriculum to meet the needs of our students and will continue to facilitate site based teacher teams in utilizing these curriculums. This year we implemented the First Author curriculum across the organization. The impact of this has been an increase in our writing scores in SANDI with 20117-18 end of year scores at +43%. The time dedicated to allow students to write has improved our writing scores where it is not our lowest performing area for our students. We will continue our work with First Author in the upcoming year to continue to have students develop their writing skills and utilizing the developmental writing scale to improve writing outcomes for our students. During the 2017-2018 school year we had math instructional coaches from the district support our teachers in utilizing and adapting GoMath curriculum to meet the needs of our students. This included in-class support and specially designed professional development during our Monday extended day PD time. During the 2018-2019 we will continue to designate Monday extended day PD time and provide on-going support throughout the school year, as well as designated time for site based professional learning communities to further develop their math instruction to better our math practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students in alternate assessment programs in grades K-12 will demonstrate improved performance in understanding mathematical concepts as measured by an average of 5% increase on the FAST assessment in the area of Measurement and Data from Fall 2018 to Spring 2019. 5  Administrators, Teachers, Related Service Providers, Paraprofessionals and District Coaches will be used for the successful completion of this goal. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 277Q will utilize the District sponsored professional development to support teacher training in Math instruction, routines and curriculum . Teachers who attend these workshops will be asked to design professional development for extended Mondays around this topic. All students in grades K-12 All students in grades K-12 277Q Curriculum team will meet weekly to refine the GoMath and Equals curriculums to meet the needs of our student populations. Teacher teams will meet during common planning time to analyze student work samples to gather data, adjust planning and instruction and plan next steps to meet individual needs of students in the area of math awareness and measurement and data. The curriculum team will meet weekly design and refine supporting assessments, activities and routines to assess math standards and/or essential elements in math across grade levels to address the needs of our English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. All students in grades K-12 All students in grades K-12 All students in grades K-12 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Classroom Teachers, District Coaches, Paraprofessionals Administrators, Curriculum Team members Sept. 2018- June 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Unit Coordinators, curriculum team members and classroom teachers. Administration, curriculum team teachers, classroom teachers, coordinators. Sept. 2018- June 2019 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration, curriculum team teachers, classroom teachers, coordinators. Parents, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Related Service Providers, Teachers, Coordinators Administration 7 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration, Teacher Representatives, School Based Coaches, District Coaches All students in grades K-12 All students in grades K-12 All students in grades K-12 Administration will review data and meet with teacher teams during each inquiry cycle throughout the year. All notes from meetings and data collected will be available in Google drive. Guidance counselors and select staff will implement parent trainings to support the development of parents own “teaching” to actively engage students in ambitious intellectual activity at home to help support the development of critical thinking skills. Administration will conduct and review data from a cycle of observations, learning walks and spot-checks to ensure the action plan is implemented. Representatives from each teacher team and administration meet monthly to discuss and present strategies and data centered around our math goal. Each representative then brings the information back to their individual sites to refine their practice. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September 2018, parents will be invited to a “Meet and Greet” at which they will have a chance to preview the curriculum that their children will be utilizing throughout the year. Additionally, a workshop on math routines at home will be planned and provided in collaboration with the parent coordinator. 8  277Q’s homework policy states that students will receive homework to reinforce in-school concepts every day. Math homework will focus on the routines and skills that are taught in class, as this is an integral part of the program and an important way to provide supports for the home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Curriculum team per session Opt-in to core curriculum - purchased curriculums for each site Class schedules allow time for teacher teams to meet 3 times a week Supervisor per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February, 2019 - In order to ensure student growth is at an average of 1.5% during the mid-point benchmark in the month of February, teacher teams will submit via Google Drive and analyze in learning community, Math SMART plan data. We expect to see that a minimum of 50% of students on the SMART plan show growth from September 2018 to February 2019. Administrators, Teachers, ENL Teachers, Related Service Providers, Paraprofessionals and District Coaches will be used for the successful completion of this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) SANDI math, SMARTplan data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In the 2017-18 school year, 277Q provided ENL services to 170 students, almost 42% of our total student population. In 2018-19, with the opening of 9 additional classes, many of which will be for kindergarten students, we anticipate growth in this demographic. In an analysis of our SANDI data from Fall 2017 to Spring 2018, it was noted that while our overall score in Communication was 56%, this number was slightly decreased for our ENL students, 52%. As a result of this information, we will be adding a third full time ENL teacher to our staff to support our ENL students for the 2018-19 school year. We feel it is also important to refine our strategies in working with our ENL population and to ensure that our speech providers and our ENL teachers have opportunities to collaborate with our classroom teachers in ensuring all students have equal access to appropriate methods of communication to support their specific language acquisition needs, thus closing the gap in communication. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all ENL students in alternate assessment programs in grades K-12 will have increased access to communication through technological supports (i.e: ipads, Augmentative devices, ENL apps, virtual field trips, etc.) as measured by an average of 3% increase in communication on the SANDI assessment from Fall 2018 to Spring 2019. Administrators, Teachers, ENL Teachers, Related Service Providers, Paraprofessionals and District Coaches will be used for the successful completion of this goal. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ENL teachers will plan and implement professional development to classroom teachers on ENL methodologies and applying various technological supports. ENL teachers will plan collaborative lessons and push-in to model these strategies utilizing technology for classroom teachers. Speech providers will plan and implement professional development to ENL and classroom teachers on appropriate use of AAC devices and will plan collaborative lessons and push-in to ENL group sessions to model these strategies for ENL teachers. ENL and speech providers will meet on a monthly basis to engage in inquiry and analyze formative assessment data for ENL students in ELA content areas and plan collaborative next steps for the students. These will be shared with classroom teachers via Google Drive. ENL teachers will expand their buddy program between our MS and HS students and our elementary school students in collaboration with speech All ENL students in grades K-12 November 2018-June 2019 Administrators, classroom teachers, ENL teachers,paraprofessionals All ENL students in grades K-12 All ENL students in grades K-12 All students in grades K-12 at 404, 78, 311 and 311 ENL students ENL teachers, speech therapists and ENL students ENL teachers, Oct. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Oct. 2018- June 2019, weekly Sept. 2018-November Speech providers, Administrators, ENL teachers, Classroom teachers, paraprofessionals. ENL teachers, speech providers, Classroom teachers Classroom Teachers, Unit Coordinators, Administration, ENL Teachers, Speech Providers 1  providers to reinforce speech and ENL communication goals for students. ENL teachers and Speech providers will work collaboratively to create an evaluative checklist of skills, aligned to SANDI/ABLLS communication domains and NYSESLAT, which will be reviewed monthly for each student during inquiry meetings. This will also be utilized to progress monitor the above mentioned goal. Administration will engage in cycles of observations with all teachers, participate in learning communities and professional development designed around our ENL students. Administration will monitor student progress towards the goal meeting with ENL teachers and reviewing data collected specific to our ENL students. N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement ENL teachers, Speech providers ENL teachers, classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, and Administration ENL teachers, classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, and Administration 2018 and ongoing Sept. 2018- June 2019 Oct. 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers, ENL students ENL teachers, Classroom teachers, ENL students N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2  Parents of ENL students will be invited to participate in a minimum of 2 workshops on strategies they can utilize in the home with their children around communication. Additionally, parents will be invited to visit our buddy reading program a minimum of 1 time during the year and will have an opportunity to learn more about our ENL program during our “Meet and Greet” in the Fall. Student IEP speech goals will reflect ENL methodologies when applicable and parents will be engaged in those goals through IEP meetings, homework and communication with both speech teachers and ENL teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session funds will be utilized to support the ENL Saturday Symposium. Utilize the Monday PD time Add a third full time ENL teacher during the 2018-2019 school year. Purchase apps and website access Schedules designed to allow common planning 3 times a week Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February, 2019 - In order to ensure we have demonstrated a 1.5% growth in communication, speech providers and ENL teachers will analyze the progress for each student based on the collaboratively designed checklist of SANDI/ABLLS Communication skills. We will determine growth by an increase in the number of mastered skills for each student. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SANDI Communication/ABLLS domains, ENL/Speech Checklist, speech provider formative assessments, ENL provider formative assessments, IEP progress monitoring, parent sign in sheets, evaluations and parent surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths In the 2017-18 school year, 100% of classroom teachers engaged in teacher-led learning communities in which they analyzed student work to determine appropriate next steps and develop instructional strategies to support struggling students. In addition, they utilized a new inquiry protocol developed by school based support staff and administrators last year with District coaches from the office of Teacher Effectiveness. This has led to an overall increase in FAST across all standards. This practice is embedded and it is reported by teachers that they value the opportunity to collaborate with peers. A team of administrators, teachers and school based support staff have met with District coaches from the office of Teacher Effectiveness to develop an inquiry cycle for the 2017-18 school year. Unit coordinators have already received training on Understanding by Design and the menu of protocols teachers will be able to utilize when analyzing their instructional practice and their student achievement data. To deepen this work for the upcoming school year, we will continue to work within the cycles of inquiry, design and update protocols to analyze student work and applying it to their planning and instruction. Additionally, we have been able to utilize the re-purposed day to provide professional development to staff and to provide time for classroom teams to meet and develop strategies for individual and groups of students. Students at 277Q demonstrated academic growth in all areas, as evidenced by both the SANDI and FAST assessment. Needs A review of SANDI data shows that while we made adequate progress in Reading (6%). An item analysis of the Reading SANDI assessment demonstrates that our Level 1 students scored lowest in Re 37, which requires them to use pictures to retell a topic and key details from a text and in Levels 2 and 3, students struggled with items that required them to locate key details in non-fiction text. In FAST, students made growth in all sub-groups on RI.1. Students in Level 2 and Level 3 FAST assessments increased an average of 18 points from Fall to Spring. Students who took the Level 1 assessment, made slightly more progress, making an increase of 22% from Fall to Spring. Revision of ELA units, based on student data, will support teachers in targeting specific skills needed for our students to close the gap in growth between our Level 1 students and level 2 and 3 students. An item analysis of FAST shows that students scored lowest in the the RI.1 item requiring them to 4  identify key details in a text. 277Q students scored an average of 2.5 (out of 4 possible) points on this item in Spring 2018, as compared to a 2.6 or higher in other RI.1 items. An analysis of ADVANCE data demonstrated that Using Data in Instruction, where roughly 29% of teachers were rated Developing. Through a review of our observation feedback in these areas, the administrative team has identified a need for the teachers to be routinely analyzing data to make instructional choices that can actively engage our students in CCLS aligned tasks. The above cited data indicates that our ELA units need to scaffold the concept of main idea and key details for students so that they are able to increase their application of this concept from "identifying" to "comparing" and "analyzing." A curriculum team worked on new ELA units using Understanding by Design planning protocols and ensuring that end of unit tasks were engaging and required active participation from students in the identified areas of need. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, site-based professional learning communities will collaboratively analyze, plan, and implement CCLS aligned units of study that will result in an increase in reading comprehension as evidenced by an average of 5% increase on FAST RI. 1 standard assessment results from Fall 2018 to Spring 2019. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 277Q Teacher teams, will conduct SANDI/FAST assessments in Fall to collect formative and summative data and identify academic and behavioral goals for students. During professional development days teams will share best practices around the data results. 277Q Teacher teams will work together to use the SANDI/FAST Instructional Planning protocol to align instructional activities to formative data. This will include specific strategies (i.e: visual supports) for our students with disabilities and ENL students. 277Q teacher teams will collaboratively plan and utilize 277Q Units of Study, First Author, EQUALS, Reading A to Z, News 2 You, Functional Libraries, social stories, GRTL, 277Q Science Curriculum, 277Q Social Students Curriculum, workstations, 1:1, SMILE, Visual Arts Blueprint, 277Q Music Units, 277Q Vocational curriculum, video modeling, 277Q Adapted Physical Education Units, FBA/BIPS, PBIS Anecdotals and supports, and Alternative and Augmentative Communication (AAC) Devices to aid in the development of skills. 277Q teacher teams will collaboratively utilize and regularly review a data collection system for 277Q Units of Study, First Author, Equals, Reading A to Z, News 2 You, Functional Libraries, social stories, GRTL, 277Q Science Curriculum, 277Q Social Students Curriculum, workstations, 1:1, SMILE, Visual Arts Blueprint, 277Q Music Units, 277Q Vocational curriculum, video modeling, FBA/BIPS, PBIS Anecdotals and supports ,and 277Q Adapted Physical Education Units and collect data daily, weekly, and monthly using data collection sheets, rubrics, teacher created checklists, and student work samples. In teams, teachers will analyze the efficacy of their instruction based on collected data. 277Q teacher teams will analyze data weekly and monthly during weekly common planning meetings and/or extended day on Mondays for 277Q Units of Study, First Author, Equals, Reading A All students in grades K-12 All students in grades K-12. All students in grades K-12. All students in grades K-12. All students in grades K-12. All students in grades K-12. All students in grades K-12. All students in grades K-12. Sept. - November, 2018, ongoing Classroom teachers, Unit coordinators Sept. 2018 - June, 2019, ongoing Sept. 2018 - June, 2019, ongoing Teachers, Unit coordinators Administrators, Classroom Teachers, Unit Coordinators, ESL teachers, Vocational teachers, APE Teachers, Art/Music Teachers. Administrators, Classroom Teachers, Unit Coordinators, ESL teachers, Vocational teachers, 6  to Z, News 2 You, Functional Libraries, social stories, GRTL, 277Q Science Curriculum, 277Q Social Students Curriculum, workstations, 1:1, SMILE, Visual Arts Blueprint, 277Q Music Units, 277Q Vocational curriculum, video modeling, FBA/BIPS, PBIS Anecdotals and supports, and 277Q Adapted Physical Education Units. Teachers and Unit Coordinators will meet as teams on Mondays during extended day for professional development as well as in inquiry and common planning times for professional collaboration. These workshops will use professional texts, intervisitation anecdotals, ADVANCE feedback, and student data to support teachers in analyzing and using data to improve instruction and use Data Driven Instruction (DDI) practices, as well as other topics. All students in grades K-12. All students in grades K-12. D75 coaches, Early Childhood Coach and verbal behavior consultants will work with staff to prepare classrooms for effective instruction and collection of student data. To build capacity, each of these coaches will support lead teachers who will manage implementation and data collection during activities and instruction. Administrators will calibrate and conduct observation and feedback cycles, highlighting teacher use of data both during classroom observations and through the analysis of teacher planning and preparation practices. Administrators, Unit Coordinators, will meet quarterly to analyze data and identify organizational trends to identify teacher teams in need of further support. Teacher will elicit qualitative informal data from parents on student performance using Home-to-School connection strategies including Parent Curriculum Night, monthly celebrations with parents in the classroom, monthly parent Trainings, Parent Teacher Conferences, Performances Title III Program, Homework Packet Connection, Classroom Websites, monthly school newsletter, Daily Communication Logs with parents, every Tuesday time allotted to connect with parents, and IEP Meetings. Teachers will include the use of this informal data to make changes to their instruction. Teachers teams will discuss this data during common planning sessions weekly. Sept. 2018 - June, 2019, APE Teachers, Art/Music Teachers. ongoing Sept. 2018 - June, 2019, weekly and monthly Administrators, Classroom Teachers, Unit Coordinators, ESL teachers, Vocational teachers, APE Teachers, Art/Music Teachers. Administration, lead teachers, teachers, coordinators. Sept. 2018 - June, 2019, ongoing Administration, Carbone consultants, Unit Coordinators, District coaches, classroom teachers, coordinators. 7  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Sept. 2018 - June, 2019,, ongoing Sept - June 2018, ongoing Sept - June 2018, ongoing Sept. - June, 2018, ongoing N/A N/A N/A Administrators, JESA Coach, teachers, paraprofessionals. Administrators, Unit Coordinators. Administration, teachers, paraprofessionals, IEP Coordinator, unit coordinators, Related Service Providers, ESL teacher, and parents. N/A N/A N/A 8  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be engaged through Parent Curriculum night, monthly celebrations aligned to Units of Study, and monthly parent workshops aligned to the goals set from teacher inquiry cycles. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 277Q ADVANCE evaluators will utilize our JESA coach to continue calibration and identify resources for evaluators to use to help support teachers in the development of their practice. Per session funds will be utilized for Curriculum Development after school meetings. District 75 JESA coach, administrators, Unit Coordinators, paraprofessionals, IEP coordinator, ENL teacher, parents, Related Service Providers, and Carbone consultants will be relied on to meet this goal. Professional literature will be utilized during the Inquiry cycle for teacher teams. Teacher teams will meet 3 times a week during the day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February, 2019 - In order to ensure adequate progress, sites will analyze End of Unit checklists, which have been developed by teacher teams across sites during Spring 2018. To be on target, we expect 50% of students to increase and average of 1 score (Rating 1-4) on the tasks aligned with RI.1. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. End of Unit Checklists scores aligned to RI.1 documented on 277Q Google Drive. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths In order to foster a collaborative school culture and to build capacity within our organization, 277Q has opted in to the re-purposed day and provides time for teachers to plan, implement and receive professional development each week on Monday extended day. Additionally, our extended day provides opportunity for full class teams to meet with related service providers and other stakeholders to ensure the highest level of support for students and their families. Paraprofessionals have the opportunity to take ownership over student progress along with classroom teachers as a result of this. To further support the professional growth of our paraprofessionals, we have utilized Rethink's training program and plan to utilize it in conjunction with the curriculum in the upcoming school year. Professional growth is nurtured at 277Q through our site based mentoring program for new teachers in which unit coordinators receive training to be an "on-demand" support system for new and struggling staff. This helps to build leadership capacity in unit coordinators, as well. Unit coordinators have been trained in "Understanding by Design" and will support it's implementation across sites in 2018-19. The use of Google Drive is highly embedded in our school's culture. This helps to ensure that all staff is able to receive, share and access information uniformly throughout the organization and provides a platform for school leadership to set clear expectations throughout our sites. Needs An analysis of ADVANCE data from the 2017-18 school year demonstrates that overall 76% of our teachers fell into the Effective range, with 15% rated Developing and 7.9% rated Highly Effective. Our strongest domain is Classroom Environment, where 18% of our teachers scored in the Highly Effective range. Our lowest scoring domain is 0  instruction, where 28% of teachers remain in the Developing stage. Using Assessment in Instruction was our lowest rated component, where 31% of teachers were rated Developing. Observation feedback indicates that teachers require additional tools to support students, specifically in using data during their lessons and when planning for future lessons. Through our decision to Opt-In for Core Curriculum and provide additional access for students to Common Core programs, we will continue to implement programs in September 2018 including Fundations, Go Math!, Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project, Social Studies Passports and STEMScopes. The continuation of these programs will provide teachers with additional opportunities to engage students appropriately and at their level in CCLS aligned, rigorous instruction. In 2018-19, we will continue and further develop our use of the re-purposed day professional development cycle to support teacher understanding of the curricula, and how to use data to drive their instruction and meet the needs of each student. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will collect and analyze student performance data in order to effectively plan and refine instructional practices as measured by an average of 3% increase in teacher ADVANCE combined ratings of "effective" and "highly effective" in component 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction, from Spring 2018 to Spring 2019. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept. 2018, ongoing Administrators, Classroom Teachers, Unit Coordinators Administrators, Classroom Teachers, Unit Coordinators Administrators, Classroom Teachers, Unit Coordinators . A training assessment will be completed by all new and existing staff to determine PD needs. All classroom and cluster teachers Administration and Unit Coordinators will use Google Drive to share and schedule professional development and intervisitation opportunities across sites. Teachers will be able to use the published training assessment to select peers to intervisit. All classroom and cluster teachers s Sept. 2018 - June, 2019, Administration will use observation feedback to determine additional professional development needs and schedule accordingly. All classroom and cluster teachers Sept. 2018 - June, 2019, Newly hired teachers will meet monthly as a team and will engage in professional development led by lead teachers based on the professional demands of the month. This will help to keep new teachers from feeling overwhelmed and will support Newly hired teachers Sept. 2018 - June, 2019, 2  veteran teachers in taking ownership over the practices of the school. Monthly assessment data will be collected by classroom teachers and shared with Administration quarterly for organization wide analysis to identify trends and plan future professional development needs. Administrators will assign tenured teacher mentors to each of our new teachers and provide time on a weekly basis for support meetings. District Coaches, and Carbone consultants will work with staff to prepare classrooms for effective implementation of the First Author Writing Curriculum. 6:1:1 classrooms will utilize the structured teaching methodology using visual schedules, programs such as Social Stories, scripts, GRTL, Essentials for Living, Abbls, Assistive Communication Devices and PECS Program, and communication applications to increase student independence and writing skills. Using the structured teaching methodology in classrooms promotes an environment that provides support for student development of all skills. Through the use of work systems, visual schedules, video modeling, routines and varied methods of presentation for student work students will be provided the tools to engage all students including English Language Learners and students with disabilities in writing. All classroom and cluster teachers, RSPs All newly hired teachers All K-5 alternate assessment students Sept. 2018 - June, 2019,, monthly/ quarterly Sept. 2018 - June, 2019, 2 hours per week June 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, elementary classroom teachers, unit coordinators, Speech therapist Administrators, classroom and cluster teachers, unit coordinators. Mentors and newly hired teachers, administration, unit coordinators District Coaches, and Carbone Consultants, Administrators 3  N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 4  Parents will be engaged with this work through our monthly parent workshops and through invitations to open classroom visits in which they will be able to observe and practice the strategies teachers are utilizing to fully engage their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Extended Mondays PD Hiring consultants from Carbone Institute and Wilson/Fundations Purchase curriculum such as SMiLE and Fundations District coaches Using Fountas and Pinnell Running Records Teacher Per Session Supervisor Per Session Class schedules adjusted for teacher teams to meet 3 times a week Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February, 2019- In order to ensure we are on track to meeting our goal, we will utilize ADVANCE dashboard and a review of observation data to ensure that there is an average of 1.5% increase in the number of teachers who were rated (combined) "effective" and "highly effective" in Using Assessment in Instruction from June 2018 to February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE observation data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We firmly believe that in order to create a successful, engaging, and effective school program for our students we must be diligent in creating strong family partnerships. Families are valuable members of the team and often the best advocates for student needs. Likewise, parents and families provide us with invaluable information about their students that help us create stronger, more effective programs. Upon analysis of parent participation data that our team and our Parent Coordinator has collected over the course of the 2017-2018 school year it was recognized that parent attendance at school events is an area of celebration for 277Q. One example of this is that we had 2 more parent workshops/events this year, increasing our number by 5%. The attendance at these events as compared to the 2016-2017 school year increased by 12%. The overall average for parent attendance at the Parent Teacher Conferences increased by 37%. Furthermore, the number of phone calls, emails, texts, and consultations increased by 105% with the initiation of using email to communicate with parents. It was a challenge gathering parents to participate in Parent Trainings as well as Parent Association Meetings. In 2015-16, parent attendance at parent trainings averaged about 1 or 2 parents per month. In 2016-17, we have been able to increase those numbers to an average of 23 family members at our 27 events this year. In 2017-2018, we have been further able to increase the number of events to 46 and family members attending these events. These events included School performances and moving up ceremonies, workshops and PTA sponsored events. To support our belief that the home-school relationship is one of extreme value, we would like to improve parent/family participation in the 2018-2019 school year. Now that our full-time parent coordinator has had two years in the organization, we intend to provide her, teachers, and families additional support to further engage parents in the school community and improve parent/family attendance at 277Q sponsored events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, to improve engagement with 277Q families, there will be an average of 3% increase in parent attendance at school and community events from June 2018 to June 2019, as measured by the number of sign-in sheets, and PCAR logged interactions with family and community. Parent Coordinator, Unit Teachers, Administrators, Teachers, Parent Association president will be used for the successful completion of this goal. 6  7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 277QTeachers will use Tuesday extended day to contact parents weekly and inform them of student progress. Additionally, they will use Tuesdays to inform them of special events with at least one month’s prior notice. Teachers will also call with a two-week and two-day reminder of any special events to confirm attendance. All parent phone calls will be recorded at each site in the parent contact log book and checked monthly by Unit Coordinators. Unit coordinators will provide monthly contact reports to Administration for any necessary follow-up with teachers. 277Q Teachers and related service providers will communicate daily in student communication books to inform them of necessary information regarding their child and the 277Q Organization at large. 277Q Related Service providers will send home bi-monthly reports providing an overview of sessions, student progress, and suggestions for work at home. 277Q Parent Coordinator will conduct initial survey of parent needs around days of week/times of Parent Association Meetings and Parent trainings to find the most ideal times and days to hold events. 277Q Administration, Unit Coordinators, Parent Coordinator and Related Service Providers will schedule, develop, and implement monthly parent training sessions using professional knowledge, Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K-12 All Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Unit Coordinators. K-12 All Students K-12 All Students weekly/ monthly Sept. 2018-June 2019 ongoing Sept. 2018-June 2019 ongoing Sept. - October, 2018, ongoing Classroom Teachers, Related Service Providers 8  professional resources, and established relationships with outside agencies that support students with disabilities (SWD). Sept. 2018-June 2019 K-12 All Students monthly Administrators, Parent Coordinator. K-12 All Students Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Unit Coordinators, Related Service Providers, Outside Agencies for SWD. Sept. 2018-June 2019 monthly Sept. 2018-June 2019 monthly Administrators, school aides, Unit Coordinators, teachers. Sept. 2018-June 2019 monthly Sept. 2018-June 2019 monthly Lead teachers, Unit coordinator, Administrators Lead teachers, Unit coordinator, Administrators, Parent Coordinator A monthly calendar will be prepared by secretarial staff and sent home across the organization at the beginning of every month to inform parents of activities, events, and important meetings. Parent Newsletters will be prepared by lead teachers at individual sites with the support of Related Service Providers and Unit coordinators and sent home monthly for parents that highlight past and future events. www.theriverviewschool.com will be updated monthly by lead teacher and parent coordinator with special event announcements, important information for parents, digital copies of newsletters and parent flyers for district and school events, and school news to create a community of informed parents. 277Q Parent Coordinator will continue to use a “Parent Email Blast” to provide digital access to important information and reminders about the 277Q Organization the broader District 75 events to arrive directly into parent email boxes. 277Q Parent coordinator will collaborate with the school tech liaison to continually update the website, and post filmed parent trainings in order to allow parents more options to attend parent workshops meeting the needs of families who require more flexibility in scheduling. K-12 All Students K-12 All Students K-12 All Students 9  N/A N/A N/A K-12 All Students K-12 All Students N/A N/A Parent Coordinator, Administrators Sept. 2018-June 2019monthly Parent Coordinator, Administrators, Unit Coordinators, School Tech Liaison N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. In addition to the above mentioned actions, we will be partnering with Marquis Studios for an ENL symposium Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 277Q will utilize our 277Q Communication Protocols, Tuesday extended day time,The Riverview School Website, Parent Newsletters, Parent Email Blast, Parent Association, Outside Agencies that support Students with Disabilities, and Local Business donations to create multiple pathways for parent communication and engagement 0  Administrators,Teachers, Related Service Providers, Parent Coordinator, Parent Association team, and Secretarial staff will be used for the successful completion of this goal. Handouts will be printed or purchased for parent meetings, workshops, and information sessions. On-line resources such as our google drive and website will be updated and utilized. Remind App Teacher per-session for after school activities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February, 2019 - An analysis of parent attendance data from all parent included events will be conducted to act as a mid-point benchmark measuring school progress towards meeting this goal. Parent attendance should show an average of 1.5% increase from 2017-18 data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent sign-in sheets, Parent School Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, One to One, Tutoring During the school day Small group, One to One, Tutoring During the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) SANDI Assessment, Student Work, Rubrics, FBA, 1:1, group and workstation data, Performance Series Assessments, Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) 277Q Curriculum SMILE Reading A to Z News 2 U ABLLSAssessment Functional Libraries Ablenet STEM Vocational Curriculum Equals Math Manipulative kits GoMath Mathematics SANDI Assessment, NYS Exams, Student Work, Performance Series Assessments, Rubrics, FBA, 1:1, group and workstation data ABLLSAssessment Math Games Math Skill Builders Ablenet Focus on Math Functional Libraries Vocational Curriculum 2  Science SANDI Assessment, NYS Exams, Student Work, Rubrics, FBA, 1:1, group and workstation data Social Studies SANDI Assessment, NYS Exams, Student Work, Rubrics, FBA, 1:1, group and workstation data Ablenet focus on Science, Small group, One to One, Tutoring During the school day BrainPop, Scholastic Magazines, National Geographic Magazines, Functional Libraries, Vocational Curriculum Attainment, Small group, One to One, Tutoring During the school day D75 Modules, Scholastic Magazine, Brain Pop, Functional Libraries, Ablenet, Social Studies Library, Vocational Curriculum PBIS Small group, One to One, Tutoring During the school day FBA data and student work At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Social Stories GRTL Emotional Literacy 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). None 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 6  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 7  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Riverview School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Riverview School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 9  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 0  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Riverview School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 1  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 3  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 4  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PS 277Q is a special education school within the New York City Department of Education's District 75. PS 277Q consists of nine sites, located throughout Queens with the main site located in Woodside. The school has a population of 405 students ranging in grades K-12. 168 (41%) are English Language Learners (ELLs). Disabilities include: intellectual disabilities, autism, multiple disabilities, learning disabilities, and speech impairment, as described on students' Individualized Education Program. The classroom ratios at PS 277Q vary throughout the nine sites and include: 12:1:1, 8:1:1 and 6:1:1. The 168 ELLs throughout the eight sites are at the Entering, Emerging, Expanding and Transitioning English language proficiency levels according to the NYSESLAT 2017. The following languages are spoken in the homes of the students at PS 277Q: Bengali, Arabic, Punjabi, Burmese, Gujarati, Romanian, Mandarin, Nepali, Swedish, Urdu, Cantonese, Spanish, Korean, Polish and Russian. Freestanding ENL Program: The ENL teachers utilize both the integrated and stand-alone instructional models of ENL instruction as mandated by CR Part 154. ENL instruction incorporates ENL methodologies such as Total Physical Response (TPR), Language Experience Approach, and strategies such as Scaffolding Techniques (bridging, text re-presentation, modeling) and the use of graphic organizers. Instruction is aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards and the New Language Art Progressions. Additionally, the ENL teachers utilize our school's adapted curriculum during the stand-alone sessions so the students will not lose valuable instructional time. 277Q's Supplemental Title III Instructional Program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays from March to June for 22 sessions / 2 hours each session (2:30 pm to 4:30 pm), at the off site in Corona. Instruction will be delivered in English using ENL methodologies by two NYS certified ENL teachers. One administrator will supervise the program. The administrator's time will start at 3:15 pm because their day finishes at 3:10. Five paraprofessionals will provide instructional support. Two paraprofessionals in the program will speak Spanish and provide language support to the students and parents. Three of the students participating in the program require a 1:1 paraprofessional. The supplemental instructional program will serve 24 students in grades 6 , 7 and 8. The ratio of the students that are participating is 12:1:1. The students will be divided into two groups so they will maintain the appropriate grade range and IEP ratio. The home languages of the students in the program include Spanish and Mandarin . The theme of the supplemental program is "Cultural Diversity Around Us". It will support ELL students by exposing them to different cultures in their Queens communities. This program will focus on supporting the students who are reading below grade level, while helping them build their speaking, listening, reading, writing, vocational and artistic skills. The ELL students face many barriers. Due to their limited English language proficiency and disabilities they may have 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information a decreased awareness of their surroundings and how to engage functionally in their communities. In addition, these students require experiences in order to develop career readiness and independent living skills. The program's goal is to provide these students with exposure, opportunity and instruction to develop the aforementioned skills. The use of authentic materials and the implementation of lessons which address meaningful cultural experiences will allow the students to comprehend various aspects of diverse cultures and identify their role within this schema. The book titled “The Neighborhoods in Queens” will help to support the program. This book will assist the ENL teachers by providing the information needed regarding the cultures in Queens. In addition, research conducted by the Afterschool Alliance "The most recent evaluations available today continue to support the important role after school plays in student development and success." (afterschoolalliance.org/research reports) Each week of the program will be divided into two instructional parts. Wednesday will target reading. Each week the materials will present one of the cultures/areas being studied. The ENL teachers will also target skills needed for the NYSESLAT. Using Google Earth students will locate and match cultures to specific Queens neighborhoods. In addition, multi-faceted teaching approaches will be used to explore the cultures, foods, dance, music and traditions being studied in the Title III program. This program will help to broaden the knowledge of their community. The ENL teachers will provide various means for students to access learning such as videos, hands-on activities, prezis and social stories. The ENL teachers will use the "Getting Ready for NYSESLAT" books to work with students on skills needed for NYSESLAT. They will also generalize those skills to utilize in the classroom and their daily lives. On Thursdays students will explore various neighborhoods in Queens that house specific cultures. The use of IPads (specifically Google Earth for IOS devices) will enable students to locate restaurants, stores and any additional culturally relevant community based places of interest. The teacher will present a menu from a particular restaurant and culture identified by the students. After reading the menu, the students will role-play ordering food from the menu and tally up total expenditures and means of payment. Additionally, specific dishes representing each culture studied will be ordered from some of the restaurants, in order to allow students to sample some of the items included in instruction. This activity will allow students to broaden their knowledge of foods from different cultures and foster the development of skills essential for the students to be able to function independently in their communities. The cookbook "Queens: A Culinary Passport: Exploring Ethnic Cuisine in New York City's Most Diverse Borough" will serve as a reference to the ENL teachers. On the last week of the program the students and parents will participate in a cultural celebration. The celebration will allow the students to revisit all of the cultures that were introduced during the Title III program. Throughout the program, the ENL teachers will focus on community awareness, career readiness and work related skills. The ENL teachers will differentiate instructional materials according to the ELL students' levels of performance. According to James W. Guthrie "educational goals for students with autism aim for skills in communication, social interaction, appropriate behavior, choice making, and functional academic abilities." Through our Title III program we believe that we hit all of the skills that are important for our students. 8  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The ENL teachers will provide professional development to the administrator and 5 paraprofessionals. The PDs will take place on alternating Wednesdays for 2 hours. The administrator's hours will start at 3:15 pm. There will be 3 PDs: one in the beginning of the program, one in the middle and one at the end of the program. The objective of the PDs will be to familiarize the staff with the different cultures represented in Queen's neighborhoods, as well as understand the diverse needs of our immigrant students and their families. Additionally, it will increase awareness of instructional best practices to be used in the classroom. The ENL teachers will provide an outline of the activities that will take place in each session. The participants will keep a journal of the PD sessions in order to facilitate evaluation and reflection at the end of the program. The last PD will allow the staff to reflect and evaluate the Title III program and discuss how to improve the program. According to Robert Half (2017), providing professional development for staff is important because "... it can have an immediate effect on productivity. Professional development can also help raise overall staff expertise when employees have vastly different backgrounds." ( https://www.roberthalf.com/blog/6-ways-professional-development-training-benefits-your-entire-organization ) Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Prior to the commencement of the program, the parents will receive a Title III letter in their home/preferred language inviting them to participate in the program along side their children. Letters will be sent in the students' backpacks and via U.S. mail. The letters will include information about the instructional session dates and topics that will be covered. The parent coordinator will follow up and make a series of phone calls to make sure parents understand the purpose of the program and it's benefit for them and their children. Parents will be invited to participate in the activities during the program with their children so they can learn strategies from the teachers. The strategies will help the parents learn how to work with their children at home. This will also provide an opportunity for the parents to get to know their communities while improving their English skills along side their children. 9 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $16,730.32  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff $4,503.68 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Instructional Program: 2 teachers x 22 sessions (2 hrs. each) $60.65 = $5,337.20 1 administrator x 22 sessions (1.25 hrs each) x $63.45 = $1,744.88 5 paraprofessionals x 22 sessions (2 hrs. each) x $34.73= $7,640.60 Professional Development: 2 teachers x 3 sessions x 2 hours each x $60.65 = $727.80 1 administrator x 3 sessions x 1.25 hours each x $63.45 = $237.94 5 paraprofessionals x 3 sessions x 2 hours each x $34.73 = $1,041.90 "The Neighborhoods of Queens" text = $22.00 "Queens: A Culinary Passport: Exploring Ethnic Cuisine in New York City's Most Diverse Borough" text = $17.00 The World in a City: Traveling the Globe Through the Neighborhoods of the New New York = $15.05 Lets Look at Countries Book set = $39.62 Lakeshore Learning: 5 different multicultural book sets = $380.50 Getting Ready for NYSESLAT Books 4 grades @ $148 each = $592.00 iPad minis: 6 @ $367 each = $2,202.00 0 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. iPad mini cases: 6 @ $34.19 = $205.14 Seagate backup plus slim hard drive: 2 @ $61.06 = $122.12 Take-out cultural food for the program: $550.00 Misc. Classroom Supplies (laminating sheets, pencils, markers, notebooks, construction paper, etc.) = $358.25 n/a n/a $21,454 Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a $220 $21,454 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name The Riverview School Borough Queens School Number 277 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Annette Beale Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Amanda DuttonTasia Anagnosto Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Angela Pomo Coach School Counselor Parent Rebecca Moran Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 405 2 Total number of ELLs 168 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 41.48%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess the early literacy skills of our K-12 ELLs that take standardized assessments, our school uses TCRWP (Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project) Individual Running Records and classroom data collection. To assess the early literacy skills of our K-12 ELLs that take NYSAA, our school uses SANDI/FAST (Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory/Formative Assessment of Standards Task) and classroom data collection. With the information we obtain from the results of the aforementioned assessments we identify students that are "at risk" and we adjust our school's instructional plan accordingly. We will look at skills that students are struggling with and create academic plans for students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We will discuss our findings at team meetings and common planning meetings and begin to develop plans with intervention strategies that can be implemented for our ELL students. 3  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At the end of each year 277Q will evaluate the success of our program for ELLs by examining the data from the NYSESLAT, NYSAA and SANDI scores. We will compare the scores to students' previous years' scores and track the progress of each ELL's individual goals on the their IEP. We will also look at formal and informal observations to evaluate student growth and thus success of our program. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The Language Allocation Policy team will meet once the summative data has been gathered. The LAP team will set up an inquiry team to interpret data and develop appropriate interventions. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Following the RTI model, our administrators will bring together invested key players and generate a team. The team will work together to provide students with the support they need in the classroom. The team will develop a more effective instructional program for the students. There needs to be an investigation into the students' educational and linguistic history. Our school offer Tier 3 services to our students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our English Language Learners participate in alternate assessment however they also participate in the NYSESLAT. The data pattern revealed that the majority of our students tested at the Entering level on the NYSESLAT. Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI) Communication sub-test is also evaluated to set clear goals for our English Language Learners. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The LAP team will set up team meetings and inquiry teams to disseminate the data from the assessments. The ENL teachers collaborate with the speech therapists to disseminate the data gathered from the SANDI Communication sub-test. Data is collected to track student's progress toward goals made from the SANDI Communication sub-test. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ELL students are in self-contained classrooms and are grouped heterogeneously by proficiency level for standalone ENL and integrated ENL/ELA model. Each group will maintain the appropriate 3 contiguous grades and IEP Ratio (12:1:1, 6:1:1, & 8:1:1). The Integrated ENL model is provided by the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. We currently do not have a TBE. c. DL program. If applicable. We currently do not have a DL program. 4  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In our model, the ENL teacher will provide a detailed schedule to the Principal and Assistant Principals in order to ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes are being provided in agreement with grade and proficiency levels. Our students receive the maximum number of allowable ENL minutes given the staffing and geographical constraints of our organization. This is in accordance with explicit CR Part 154 regulations. We do not have a TBE class and therefore no HLA. The ENL teacher will meet with a District 75 Coach to review her schedule to ensure she is providing the mandated number of instructional minutes to our ELL students. The classroom teacher will work in conjunction with the ENL teacher to ensure that the mandated number of ENL and ELA instructional minutes are being met. The classroom teachers will also be given a copy of the ENL teacher’s schedule. As per the CR Part 154 mandate, our students are placed in the 5 proficiency levels (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding) and the breakdown of minutes is as follows: Grades K-8 Entering: 360 minutes total – 180 minutes of standalone and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Emerging: 360 minutes total – 90 minutes of standalone, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and the flexibility 90 minutes of standalone or integrated. Transitioning: 180 minutes total – 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and the flexibility of 90 minutes of standalone or integrated. Expanding: 180 minutes total – 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA Commanding: 90 minutes total – 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA Grades 9-12 Entering: 540 minutes total – 180 minutes of standalone and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and the flexibility of 180 minutes of standalone or integrated. Emerging: 360 minutes total – 90 minutes of standalone, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and the flexibility of 90 minutes of standalone or integrated. Transitioning: 180 minutes total – 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and the flexibility of 90 minutes of standalone or integrated. Expanding: 180 minutes total – 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA Commanding: 90 minutes total – 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our models (ENL standalone/integrated) content areas will be delivered by engaging the ENL teacher and the content-area teachers in curriculum planning, implementation, and rigorous professional development. Instruction is designed to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our staff will work to effectively group students, maximize use of instructional time, while integrating language development and literacy in all content areas in English and in the students' home language. Teachers use instructional approaches and methodologies like cooperative learning/group work, discovery, expository learning, brainstorming, demonstration method, role play, differentiation, Think-Pair-Share, Learning Experience Approach, and small group instruction to enrich language development. Home language support is given by Alternate Placement Paraprofessionals when available/appropriate. The ENL teacher uses teacher-made materials, adapted books and differentiated worksheets. 5  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We do not have TBE program, but alternate placement paras are used to assist students in their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE students will be taught using a multi-sensory and multicultural approach along with intensive literacy/language instruction in cooperative groups in a print rich environment with differentiated instruction. ENL materials are infused throughout all aspects of the instruction SIFE students receive. They have access to libraries that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and contain supplemental materials in their home language. The libraries include a variety of books on all levels that support the backgrounds, strengths, and English language needs of our SIFE students. SIFE students will work the ENL teacher who will collaborate with the classroom teacher. The use of technology will also be incorporated into the curriculum for all SIFE students. Goals are met by using instructional approaches and methods such as cooperative learning/group work, discovery, expository learning, Think-Share-Pair, graphic organizers, brainstorming, realia, demonstration method, role play, differentiation, and small group instruction in English and their home language. Newcomer ELL students are subject to the same Common Core Learning Standards as non-ELL students. In addition to meeting the ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies and all other Common Core Learning Standards, ELL students will demonstrate cross-cultural knowledge and understanding by using culturally appropriate behaviors. They are expected to have knowledge of local and United States cultures and practices in their interactions with others while in their present environment. As Newcomer ELL students the staff needs to modify the course work and their methods of instruction as needed. Goals are met by using visual supports, graphic organizers and hands-on activities. Staff may speak the students' home language for support (if available) and slowly fade into just English as the school years progresses. Developing ELLs are also held to the same Common Core Standards as non-ELL students. In addition to meeting the ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies and all other common core standards. Developing ELL students will demonstrate cross-cultural knowledge and understanding by using culturally appropriate behaviors. The staff modify the course work and their methods of instruction as needed. Goals are met by using instructional approaches and methods like cooperative learning/group work, intensive literacy/language instruction, flexible scheduling, print rich environment, discovery, expository learning, brainstorming, demonstration method, role play, Realia, Think-Pair-Share, Graphic Organizers,differentiation, and small group instruction in English and in their home language. All ELL students in grades 3-12, that have been receiving ENL services for four to six years will receive additional ELA Academic Intervention Services (AIS) instruction. Long-term ELLs ELL students that have been receiving ENL services Long-Term (six years or more) are subject to the same common core standards as non-ELL students. In addition to meeting the ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies and all other common core standards, ELL students will demonstrate cross-cultural knowledge and understanding by using culturally appropriate behaviors. They are expected to have knowledge of local and United States cultures and practices in their interactions with others while in their present environment. Our ENL teacher and instructional staff adapt the curriculum to meet the needs of these students. They modify the course work and their methods of instruction as needed. Goals are met by using instructional approaches and methods like cooperative learning/group work, intensive literacy/language instruction, flexible scheduling, graphic organizers, print rich environment, discovery, expository learning, brainstorming, demonstration method, role play, differentiation, and small group instruction in English and in their home language. All ELLs grades 3-12 that have been receiving ENL services for four-six years will receive additional ELA Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Instruction. Former ELLs (1 and 2 years after attaining Commanding status on the NYSESLAT ) will receive AIS (Academic Intervention Services) for extra support and also receive half a unit (90 minutes) of ENL for a minimum of two years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 6  The instructional strategies and grade-level materials teachers of ELL students with disabilities use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher will meet weekly with the classroom teachers at common planning meetings to discuss instruction and strategies. Every child in our program (all grades) has an IEP and is a special education student. Each instructional strategy and all materials that are used encompass all aspects of Balanced Literacy. Every classroom has a SmartBoard. Our Standardized Assessment ELLs in grades K-8 use instructional strategies and grade-level materials such as Fundations (Orton-Gillingham multi-sensory program that provides skill development in phonics, fluency, phonemic awareness, vocabulary and spelling and decoding), leveled Libraries and Scholastic Magazine The Instruction is differentiated for all ELL subgroups where students work with the ENL teacher who alternates the integrated and standalone models. The use of technology will also be incorporated into the curriculum for any SIFE students. Goals are met by using instructional approaches and methods such as cooperative learning/group work, discovery, expository learning, Think-Share-Pair, Graphic Organizers, brainstorming, Realia, demonstration method, role play, differentiation, and small group instruction in English and their alternate placement paras for home language support (if available). Our Alternate Assessment ELLs in grades K-12 (non-graded) use a variety of instructional strategies and grade level materials based on TEACCH methodology. Such strategies and materials as; Fundations (Orton-Gillingham multi-sensory program that provides skill development in phonics, fluency, phonemic awareness, vocabulary and spelling and decoding), Scholastic Magazine, SMILE (a highly structured, multi-sensory program that engages complex learners in a sequential program beginning with attention and imitation tasks, through phoneme and syllable learning, noun vocabulary and then moving onto simple sentences and short stories), Headsprout (an ELA computer program), and Ablenet Focus on Science. They also participate in JARS (Joint Action Routine) which is a functional curriculum used with students with disabilities collaboratively with Speech and Language teachers. Additionally, our ELL students use common core aligned, rubric based, cross curricular units of study with a pacing calendar. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable diverse ELLs with disabilities to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. This is attained by using special education strategies and methodologies, such as TEACCH, that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and are cross curricular. Instruction provided in a District 75, special education setting in accordance with the child’s IEP. The ENL teacher will use the integrated and standalone models. Small student to teacher ratio affords us scheduling flexibility and the capability to provide instruction using appropriate scaffolding techniques while placing a high value on culture and student diversity. SETTS teachers conduct observations and collect academic data- pre/post assessments for academic units. Data collected from a behavior contingency plan developed by the SETTS teacher is utilized to assess independence, academic performance, socialization and management of peer relations. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Intervention programs will be offered at 277Q for ELL’s in all subgroups (SIFE, newcomers less than three years of ENL services, three to six years of ENL services, six years and over of ENL services, and special needs). We will focus on all content areas using programs such as Fundations, Wilson Foundations, JARS, Scholastic Magazine, Weekly Reader, Brain Pop, Ablenet Focus on Science, Headsprout, AIS and SMILE. These interventions are offered in English with the assistance of the ENL teacher and an Alternate Placement Paraprofessional when necessary and are all aligned to the CCLS. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The attainment curriculum, SMILE and Wilson are being considered for the upcoming school year. Students require this intervention to improve scores on NYSESLAT. 7  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not discontinuing any programs or services at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs will be afforded equal access to all school programs (during school and after school) including but not limited to CHAMPS Programs, Academic Intervention Services, GRTL Program, Rock Ucation Program and Title III in accordance with their IEPs and the Chancellor's Regulations. The Title III program supports language development for our ELLs. Reading, writing, listening and speaking skills are addressed throughout the Title III program to help develop students' English proficiency. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. To support ELLs, our school will use a variety of instructional materials, including technology. Every classroom has a Smart Board, many ELLs uses AACs (Augmentative Communication Devices) as per their IEP, all ELL students have access to MAC laptops and MAC's with Touch Screens. Classroom teachers and ENL Teachers use the boardmaker computer program to create Mayer-Johnson picture cues, color printers and laminators to effectively communicate with their ELL students. Instructionally, we utilize Wilson Fundantions, NYSAA Pacing calendar, teacher made materials, i-pads (specific language programs), collaborative materials made with the classroom teacher, and any specific manipulatives used by our support staff such as Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, and Speech and Language Therapy. In addition, depending on the age/grade of the ELL students and his/her IEP the following instructional materials (in alignment to the CCLS) may be used: Wilson Fundations/Foundations, Words your Way, Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Readers, Scholastic Magazine, Reading Street, SMILE, Headsprout, Ablenet Focus on Science and JARS. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ENL teacher will teach with an integrated/standalone model as well as the use of alternate placement paras for their home language support in necessary classrooms. We do not have a TBE or Dual Language program. Home language support will be delivered by using modified instructional, functional curriculum that is tailored to meet their ENL needs in accordance with their IEPs and the Common Core Learning Standards. Alternate placement paras will provide home language support when appropriate. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The required services support and resources correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels because we will follow the New York State CR Part 154 mandated number of units of support for ELLs and IEP mandated services. Classroom resources are available to all ELL students. Based on the students' proficiency level on the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL the ENL teacher will provide the mandated number of minutes. Lessons are developed to be age-appropriate and adapted to be suitable for the students' cognitive needs. The Chancellor regulation guidelines are used to determine services and supports so they correspond to ELL grade and age levels. Teacher made materials are used to adapt ELL/SWD's to correspond to age/grade and cognitive needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All of our 7 sites are co-located. We make sure all of the ELLs' needs are met in a variety of different ways. At our middle school site @311 the 12:1:1 students have lunch and recess with the general education students. This program is titled "Social Buddies" because it allows some of the ELLs to meet and interact with students and work on their social skills. The general education students also come into the 6:1:1 classrooms and read to the students. This program fosters academic, linguistic and socioemotional skills for the ELLs. We have inclusion programs at two of our sites (@290 and @404). We make sure to create skill building activities and professional developments that include all staff. 8  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In the beginning of the school year, newly enrolled ELL students and their parents will be invited to come to school and meet with their ENL teacher, the parent coordinator, and the classroom teacher. They will receive a letter in their home language inviting them. All newly enrolled students are invited to attend the Chapter 683 Summer Program. Throughout the school year ELLs and their parents will be invited to all PA meetings, workshops organized by the parent coordinator, parent/teacher Conferences, and IEP meetings. The parents will receive letters in their home language and interpreters will be provided when needed. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 277Q does not offer any language electives at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 277Q does not offer a dual language program at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our school provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English Language Learners. 15 percent of the school professional development hours for all teachers is dedicated to language acquisition including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. PDs for current year: September 8, November 16, December 8, January 25, and March 7. The English as a New Language Teacher maintains 50 percent of her professional development hours dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. The ENL professional developments are offered by the District 75 Office of ELLs as well as DELLSS. Classroom teachers are invited to join ENL teacher for PDs offered by the District 75 office. They assist with strategies and adapted materials that are used as support for students. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. On Mondays following Carmen Farina's scheduled professional development period we implement professional development sessions equal to 15% of the total professional development for all teachers. Sessions are prepared and implemented by the ENL teachers. Agendas and sign-in attendance sheets maintained for all meetings by clerical staff. Our ENL teachers maintain their professional development through the ELL office and regular attendance at ongoing workshops. The ENL teachers receive certificates to document attendance and 50% of professional development. Activities include videos on ELL students, co-teaching, sample lessons reviewed and modeled, group games and icebreakers are organized to review CR Part 154.2 mandates. Clerical staff maintain attendance and agendas for across all 5 sites. 9  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Throughout the school year ELLs and their parents will be invited to all PA meetings, workshops organized by the parent coordinator. In addition there are mandated IEP meetings and a face to face meeting with parents to discuss progress towards language acquisition as mandated by the CR-Part 154. The ENL teacher will also contact parents during our designated time for parent outreach. The parents will receive letters in their home language and translators will be provided when needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are a valuable resource for our ENL teacher and classroom teachers because they have essential information about their children that is vital for planning meaningful educational experiences. Throughout the year we plan events that consider the cultural backgrounds of all of our students. The ELL parents are invited to participate in PTA meetings, best practices fair, classroom celebrations as well as class field trips. We are beginning to develop relationships with community based organizations. To assess the needs of our parents our ENL teacher meets with parents to discuss specific needs of families. Also, staff (alternate placement paras/bilingual teachers) and the Interpretation and Translation Department, are available during conferences and other non-ELL related workshops for support. Our non-ELL related workshops for parents usually pertain to children with disabilities on standard based instruction. We also provide workshops that are requested by parents. Our school’s social worker, unit coordinators and ENL teacher ensures adequate communication with parents and families of ELL students and plans accordingly when the parents voice their needs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 0  1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Annette Beale, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Riverview School School DBN: 75Q277 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Annette Beale Title Principal Angela Pomo Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Amanda Dutton ENL/Bilingual Teacher Rebecca Moran Parent Tasia Anagnostopoulos/ ENL Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75Q277 School Name: The Riverview School Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We collect data from Part III of the HLIS, blue cards, ATS and surveys are sent home to maintain parent preferences. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Spanish, Chinese, Bengali, Urdu, Nepali, Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 4  Swedish, Polish, Russian and Punjabi. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Notices i.e. parent teacher confrerence announcements, monthly calendars and notices of important dates. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 1. Parent teacher conferences - November and March 2. Regular parent outreach as needs arise 3. Attendance teacher phone calls & visits as needed 4. IEP meetings. 5. LPT meetings 5  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At the beginning of the school year an information notice will be sent to parents outlining availability of translation and interpretation services. Parent questionaire will be administered before & after IEP meetings, parent teacher conferences etc. to confirm availability of services are consistently offered and met. 6 
