 30Q291 School Name: HUNTERS POINT COMMUNITY MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: SARAH GOODMAN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Hunter’s Point Community Middle School 343000010291 6,7,8 School Number (DBN): 30Q291 1-50 51 st Avenue Queens, NY 11101 718 609 3300 718 609 3319 Phone Number: Fax: Sarah Goodman Sgoodma4@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Sarah Goodman Ellen Halloran Ivon Villacis Maria Perdigon N/A Michelle Oliviera Leah Lederman District Information Geographical District: 30 Dr. Philip Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North Queens, NY 11101 Superintendent’s Office Address: pcompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 391 6122 Phone Number: 718 391 6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   North Queens Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North Long Island City, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Sarah Goodman Ellen Halloran IvonVillacis N/A N/A Michelle Oliviera Leah Lederman Maria Perdigon Shirley Rivera *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ PTA Member/ PTA   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ruth Martins Elizabeth Jones Andrew Rodriguez Mike DeBois Taryn Martinez Michelle Lederman Member/ PTA Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ PTA Member/ PTA Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school is based around the three core values of scholarship, creativity, and community. Our students are diverse in many ways including academically, socio-economically, and ethnically while having a range of learning styles and developing adolescent personalities and interests. We take advantage of our diversity while meeting the intellectual and well-being needs of every child by incorporating inclusive and flexible groupings along with a wide variety of rigorous academic, athletic, artistic, and social offerings while keeping a small, family feeling.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Hunter’s Point Community Middle School opened in September of 2013 as part of an urban development zone in Long Island City, Queens. Some of our important partnerships include the Billion Oyster Project with the NY Harbor School, the American Museum of Natural History, the MSQI DOE initiative, the Learning Partners Program, the Urban Debate League, MindUP, Broadway Jr., and our shared campus schools the Academy of TV and Film and the Riverview School as well as our afterschool program with 82nd Street Academics. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school has a D75 inclusion program, a large ICT population and many other students that enter our school reading below grade level. All of these groups need high levels of academic support. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our CEP goals are designed to help us achieve this. For example, our data driven staff utilizes inquiry and the Professional Learning Community (PLC) model to identify common academic needs. This year, a review of test results and student work revealed a need to support reading skills across content areas (CEP Goal #1/Rigorous Academics). We have implemented a schedule of small group reading instruction (CD= Cerebral Diversity) and focused professional development around reading in all subjects to meet this need. Supporting students is also at the heart of our Crew Advisory and Student Led Conferences (SLCs/CEP Goal #2/Student Supports. Our schedule provides us with time this year to support our students with their social/emotional development, community relationships, and academic advising/SLC preparation. Rethinking the standard period structure and Parent/Teacher Conferences calendar allows us to have more time for students and advisors to work with each other during the week and with families throughout the year. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q291 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 421 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 12 13 6 20 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 12 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 51.0% % Attendance Rate 48.7% % Reduced Lunch 4.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 48.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 24.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.25 0% 33% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 62.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 56 56 2 96.1% 3.1% 23.8% 9.7% 14.0% 3.6% 0 30% 3.2 54.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A YES NO YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  Progress across all levels on state ELA and Math exams and accumulation of over 500 Regents credits from grade 8 students in 2017-8  Unified understanding and use of Hess’ Cognitive Rigor Matrix to define rigor as a school and holding students and staff to high expectations as noted by an area of celebration and a Well-Developed on the 2014-2015 Quality Review for 3.4.  Collaboratively developed standards based unit plans, assessments, and rubrics for project based learning across departments as noted by a Well-Developed on the 2014-2015 Quality Review for 1.1 Needs:    Improved rate of progress for level 1 and 2 students, SWD, and ELL students in ELA and Math state test scores Improved rate of DRP reading growth for most at risk students Improve differentiated work and supports for varying student abilities to improve reading, written extended responses, and math performance as indicated by a Proficient and Area of Focus for 1.2 on the 2014-2015 Quality Review leading to higher levels of student achievement as focused on through the Framework for Great Schools. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. CEP Goal 1: By June 2019, HPCMS will have utilized our instructional focus on advanced literacy strategies across content areas and within CDs with a focus on vocabulary, text annotations, and discussion protocols to move 30% of the students scoring Levels 1 and 2 on the DRP (Degrees of Reading Power) assessment up half a level. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Targeted intervention and support for ELLS, SWD, and other high need students on reading skills in small groups/cerebral diversity High need students Feb-June More time spent on reading strategies within content area classes through cycles of learning supported by our LPP work All students Dec-June Sharing of data and strategies with parents through APTT (Academic Parent Teacher Teams) around reading work that can be done at home All families Nov-June Planning Time for teacher collaboration for assignment development, norming, and sharing of best practices and exemplars in department wide and grade team meetings All teachers Dec-June 3b – Parent and Family Engagement ELL and Special Education Specialists, Literacy Coach, Staff trained in reading intervention work Departments and Teachers, literacy coach All teachers, parent coordinator, literacy coach Principal, Instructional Cabinet How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will have a series of learning walks in the fall and family workshops throughout the year run by our parent coordinator and teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Additional planning time through per session for after school hours and per diem for substitute teachers, diverse reading and math materials, copy materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 3  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019,the administration will monitor DRP levels of the whole school and compare the data to September scores to measure if the numbers of students below grade level is decreasing as a result of our school wide approach to implementing effective reading strategies. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) DRP test scores Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths:  Very high scores on most areas of the LES particularly around student safety and creating a welcoming and rigorous environment and a Well-Developed and Area of Celebration for 3.4, High Expectations, on the 2014-2015 Quality Review  Cerebral Diversity/Crew Advisory structure where students meet in small groups to develop supportive relationships with their peers and teachers Needs:  The lowest area of student perception scores in the student survey were around student engagement  On the LES many students reported behavior was a concern in classrooms and that discipline was not always fair. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. CEP Goal 2: By June 2019, HPCMS will have improved our whole child approach to a positive school culture by including teachers and students in dialogue around identifying areas of growth and potential solutions to increase student responses related to classroom behavior (Q6a-e, Q20b-Q20i) from 58% to 63% and fair discipline from 65% to 70% (Q4h) on the Learning Environment Survey. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Continued development of our crew/advisory program to develop strong relationships between students, families, and staff through learning walks, Parent Teacher Teams, and Student Led Conferences through professional development from CREATES. On-going tracking of grades, afterschool attendance, lateness, and behavior by crew advisors through weekly academic check ins with students and monthly outreach with families based on google doc data supported by professional development on usage by staff Targeted interventions that occur one on one and in small groups through a clear self-peer-staff referral system Build trust through on-hand translators for parents, Learning Walks, and communications 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Oct-June All Staff Lowest third, Oct- June All Staff- Advisors Oct-June Lowest third, at risk students, SWD, Guidance counselor, Special Education Teachers, Deans, Social Worker Families On-going Parent coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our new family handbook outlines expectations for academics and behavior as developed and reviewed by our staff and parent coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session for afterschool, Saturday School,. Common planning time, professional development, school culture meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 6  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019 the administration, SLT, and School Culture Team will monitor student responses to questions from a mid-year google survey and compare the data to positive responses are increasing as a result of a comprehensive approach to supporting positive culture. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use an internal google form Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Strong department curricular planning and intervisition culture in place   Extensive use of co-teaching models in ICT and non-ICT classrooms Needs:  Achievement gap is not closing significantly for lowest third, SWD, ELLs Low teacher rates of feeling positive about PD cycles and inquiry work  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. CEP Goal 3: By June 2019, our teacher teams will have used sustained periods of common planning time to improve interdisciplinary teacher collaboration and efficacy in implementing Missions by 20% as measured by Student and Teacher Mission Perception Surveys implemented in the winter and spring. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Track JumpRope scores to ensure all students make progress and provide targeted work by implementing strategies and small group interventions for our most at risk students as developed within inquiry groups including intervisitations with low inference notes and debriefing protocols to build trust within Full Staff Professional Development Literacy Cycles and Department and Grade Team PLC meeting times related to Missions. Implement Mission Survey. On-going tracking of grades and interventions based on student jumprope grades and reviews of student work regarding progress during department PLC meeting times related to Missions. Saturday School for Math and ELA support and test preparation with parent communication and partnership. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Oct-June All Staff All students, at risk readers All students Oct-June All teachers Feb-April Teachers Lowest Third, Students Approaching Grade Level Implement post survey related to Missions. All Students Feb-April staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will have a series of learning walks in the fall and family workshops throughout the year run by our parent coordinator and teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Planning Time and coverages for inquiry planning and intervisitations, afterschool CBO, per session for planning and teaching Saturday School Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 9  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019,the administration will monitor areas of need outlined in initial mission survey to determine if the school is on a course to meet the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School created google form. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: ● High Teacher Satisfaction Response Rate on LES ● Regular Teacher/Principal, Teacher/Assistant Principal, Mentor/Mentee, and Department Meeting check –in structure ● Collaborative use of Danielson Rubric for Teacher Development Needs:  LES show low levels of staff perceptions that new programs are explicitly explained, supported and followed through on  Create a system to support and evaluate all staff outside the limitations of Danielson or the S/U system to push the professional development of everyone (including Guidance Counselors, Paraprofessionals, etc.) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. CEP Goal 4: By June 2019, HPCMS administration will clearly define and track the goals, roles, and impact of new initiatives, like Showcase Schools, leading to an increase from staff from 74% to 82% (Q8e) on the Learning Environment Survey statement “once they start a new program, they [administrators] follow up to make sure that it’s working.” 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Using the instructional cabinet to draft data driven department goals that focus on increasing student achievement Review a variety of professional materials and rubrics for evaluation to custom develop the feedback process to support staff in a trusting environment where they can take risks and be recognized for their leadership accomplishments Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Dec-June Instructional Cabinet All staff Dec-June Instructional Cabinet Work with a variety of stakeholders to ensure staff feels clarity and cohesion from the administrative team Staff Dec-June Instructional Cabinet, administrative team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our SLT will meet regularly and develop a plan to communicate action items to the staff, parents, and students on a monthly basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Planning Time, per session, SLT, Instructional Cabinet Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2  By the end of February 2019, the administration will monitor staff perceptions to related effective leadership data to measure if the response rates are increasing as a result of targeted cabinet and pd work to determine if the school is on a course to meet the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The school will create a google doc of related questions for staff Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: ● Highly involved parent body active in PTA, SLT, chaperoning trips, judging at debate tournaments, etc. ● 95% attendance at Student Led Conferences Needs: ● Recent parent feedback from LES indicates that parents need more opportunities to understand how they can volunteer at our school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. CEP Goal 5: By June 2019, HPCMS will have improved our comprehensive approach to family and community ties by increasing from 82% to 86% positive family responses related to whole child wellness oriented events and volunteer opportunities on the Learning Environment Survey (Q4a). 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Increase communication about volunteer opportunities, teacher needs, and activities to support students at home through website, flyers, emails, and school messenger voice messages We will continue to implement the APTT (Academic Parent Teacher Team model in grade 7 and expand it to grade 8 to share data tracking all students with a focus on families of ELLs, SWDs, and other high need students to ensure progress to grade level standards. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All families Oct-June Parent Coordinator, SLT Oct-June Parent Coordinator, SLT All families with a focus on ELLs, SWDs, and other high need students Department chairs will prepare and deliver sessions before every learning walk illustrating what the CCLS expectations are and how our instructional model meets the expectations at PTA meetings as well as providing concrete ways parents can support teachers All families Sept-June Parent Coordinator, SLT, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 82nd St Academics is our CBO and will run a series of parent workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School messenger, SLT planning time, teacher release time for panel, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 5  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, the administration will monitor parent perceptions to related family/school ties data to measure if the response rates are increasing as a result of targeted PTA, SLT, and staff efforts to determine if the school is on a course to meet the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Our mid year google form survey will help us monitor progress Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ● State test scores ● DRP reading levels ● Jumprope Grades Mathematics ● State test scores ● Jumprope Grades Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Cerebral Diversity groupings ● Small group interventions ● During the school day ● In class groupings ● Reading intervention strategies ● Guided reading and writing strategies Math extension groupings ● Homogeneous groupings ● During lunch ● After school ● Saturday School Small group interventions During the school day ● In class groupings ● Full class skill review work ● Homogeneous groupings ● During lunch ● After school Science ● Jumprope Grades In class groupings ● Full class skill review work Social Studies ● Jumprope Grades In class groupings ● Full class skill review work Small group interventions ● Homogeneous groupings Small group interventions ● Homogeneous groupings ● Saturday Schoo During the school day ● During lunch ● After school During the school day ● During lunch ● After school 7  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● Behavioral records ● counseling ● Observations ● Teacher/family recommendations ● Small group counseling During the school day ● One on one counseling ● During lunch 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We will not be Title 1 in 2016-2017 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will not be Title 1 in 2016-2017 Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 15 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9 We provide school supplies, counseling, and family supports to partner with CBOs. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 3,462 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 1  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parental Involvement and School Quality Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement School-Parent Compact (SPC) I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 5 N/A N/A N/A N/A I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name Hunter's Point Community Middle School Borough Queens School Number 291 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sarah Goodman Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Aida Chimelis Teacher/Subject Area Sean Rosenberg/PE and TESOL Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Dimitra Munoz Superintendent Assistant Principal Kristen Shuart Coach School Counselor Gaytahri Iyer Parent Paul Cynamon Parent Coordinator Mildred Montalvo Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 7  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 404 Total number of ELLs 20 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.95% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Hunter’s Point Community Middle School (HPCMS) uses the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) at the beginning, middle, and end of the year to acquire a baseline that measures vocabulary and reading comprehension and can be reassessed multiple times to show growth. We use this data to place students into specified Reading Intervention groups. From this year’s data in September 2016, the average score of all current ELLs was 45/100 with a range of 14 to 70. 12 of the 20 ELLs are also Students with Disabilities ranging from ICT to Self-Contained. In addition, we use the Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) as a baseline for the Measure of Student Learning. The majority of ELLs are at Level L-R, which shows us they're below-grade level proficiency. Like the DRP, the data will show us the types of reading and writing intervention to use when teaching. 8  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The data allows us to plan accordingly for English language learning intervention methods that specifically cater to ELLs. The DRP is given three times during the school year allowing us to measure progress for all students. The TCRWP is also given several times throughout the year to track progress in the ELL's reading level. That data from both assessments will help in determining targeted interventions in the mainstream classroom via Integrated ENL. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? To evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs, we look at NYSESLAT and NYS ELA Test data. While our goal is for all of our ELLs to reach Commanding on the NYSESLAT, it can be challenging because most of our ELLs are SWD; therefore these students' disabilities may prevent them from reaching Commanding. We also track growth on both the NYSESLAT and NYS ELA Test to ensure our ELLs are improving. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Based on the data of both the NYSESLAT, NYS ELA Test, and in school assessments we analyze what skills our ELLs are struggling with and provide scaffolds, lessons, and work that is designed to meet the students specific needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] HPCMS uses data to guide instruction for ELLs with the help of the Response to Intervention framework’s three tiers of instructional support. ELLs are not in a self-contained ENL class, but instead they are with their native English speaking classmates. For the process, we begin with the Core of Instruction for all students, but then give a “Double Dose” of Instruction for differentiation and support. If our ELLs are still having difficulty, we then move onto Intensive Intervention where ELLs are pulled aside for small group and even individualized instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. As revealed by the NYSESLAT proficiency results, it can be seen that the majority of our ELLs are at the Expanding level. The proficiency levels across grades 6-8 are similar in that there is no noticeable trends. From the NYSESLAT Data, 0 of 20 are Entering. 0 of 20 are Emerging. 5 of 20 are Transitioning. 15 of 20 are Expanding. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the beginning of every year, our LAP team meets, analyzing the proficiency level of all of our ELLs and then makes the necessary arrangements to ensure all ELLs are receiving their appropriate minutes and types of service in compliance with New York State. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 9  In each grade, ELLs are programmed into the same homeroom regardless of proficiency level. Each grade has one homeroom with ELLs with IEPs and Gen Ed ELLs. The ENL teachers, Aida Chimelis and Sean Rosenberg, push-in to a core subject class (ELA, SS, Science or Math) to service the ELLs to accommodate the Integrated ENL mandate. They work closely with the core content teachers to devise modifications for the ELLs.During our reading intervention time which serves as the Standalone ENL time, some 6th/7th grade ELLs (students who need extra support or they are are mandated to receive stand alone time) are placed in one class. Within this class students receive additional supports in the four modalities: reading, writing, speaking and listening from an ENL instructor. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Due to heterogeneous grouping in homeroom classes, all ELLs receive the minimum 180 minutes of integrated ENL time as well as former ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL. Some ELLs also receive an additional 120 minutes of stand-alone time. ENL teachers work closely with core subject teachers to modify curricula for our ELLs. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All ELLs receive ENL instruction during core subject classes. The ENL teacher uses sheltered instruction and makes modifications to both curricula in order to cater to the language needs of ELLs and students with disabilities. He/she modifies worksheets and handouts for students so they have simplified language, are easy to read, and include graphic organizers when applicable. Sentence starters and sentence structures are also given to outline the information and teach and develop organization techniques that aid in comprehension. Since ELLs are required to read the same texts, they are given visuals, audio books, graphic novel versions, and any other visual or auditory supports available. When learning new vocabulary, the ENL teacher uses their first language, if deemed necessary, to help determine meanings of vocabulary words. In addition, there is a significant, school-wide focus on vocabulary for all students at HPCMS. As part of MSQI, we use Word Generation to develop vocabulary usage throughout content areas. This is supplementary to the general curricula for all content area classes. Each day, 20 minutes is set aside from the respective content area class to dedicate to Word Generation. Mondays are for the ELA launch where students learn the vocabulary and see it in context by reading an article. Tuesdays’ lesson occurs during math where students solve word problems with the vocabulary words used in context. Wednesdays are for science where they look at data and facts with the 5 vocabulary words used in the context of science, lessons on Thursdays occur during social studies where students take a position on the controversial topic of the week and have a debate with classmates either in small groups or whole class, then Fridays are dedicated to essay writing where students must answer the topic question for the week and use vocabulary words from the current week and previous weeks. All of this work builds vocabulary and literacy development for all students, not just ELLs. ELLs; however, are given more time and visuals to represent new, unknown concepts. In addition, the vocabulary is used across content areas, which allows for ELLs and all students to see the vocabulary words used in various settings. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At the beginning of the year, ELLs are informally assessed by the ENL teacher as soon as instruction begins. However, before that time, the ENL teacher uses the information given by the parents on the HLIS regarding the child’s literacy and oracy. Students who are new to HPCMS and need to take they NYSITELL, who have a native language of Spanish are also assessed via the SPANISH LAB if necessary. In addition, the ENL instructor uses the native language to aid in ENL instruction, by informally assessing students based on their knowledge of vocabulary in their L1. To add on, all ELLs and former ELLs (up to 0  2 years after testing out) take the state tests with accommodations such as extended time, separate location, use of bilingual dictionaries, translated exams when available, and when unavailable, adult translators are arranged. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 5a. Currently, there aren't any SIFE's at HPCMS. However in the past, we've only had one student classified as SIFE. He had some difficulty with writing; therefore, was given more time to complete written assignments. Should we have more SIFE, we would employ more services not only of the ENL teachers to intensify instruction to help students make up what they have missed due to prior years’ interruptions, but we would provide the services of all the other pedagogues who instruct the SIFE. The ENL department has already developed special materials designed to teach the alphabet and basic literacy to older children.5b. Instruction for first-year newcomers (entering and emerging) includes full immersion into the mainstream classroom with integrated ENL and free standing ENL support. Focus is made first on building basic interpersonal conversation skills through listening and speaking since oral communication skills are practiced throughout the day. Translators and bilingual dictionaries are also available for student use. Also students will receive support in their reading and writing with heavy use of visuals, scaffolds and appropriate reading texts.5c. The ELLs who are classified as transitioning have already acquired interpersonal speaking skills; however, they still need a lot of support in orthography and literacy. In addition, focus is made on addressing the skills and modalities they struggle with which preventing these students from doing well on the NYSESLAT.5d. Long-term ELLs who are usually classified as expanding are lacking the reading and writing skills necessary to pass the NYSESLAT and test out of ENL. These students are given focused intervention on reading and writing to provide them the skills needed to be successful in the classroom as well as the NYSESLAT and NYS ELA Test. Many of our ELLs are also SWD, thus more scaffolding and modification of instruction is necessary along with a clear understanding of their IEP.5e. Former ELLs have been able to test out of the ENL program; and are now classified as commanding. In order to continue to support our commanding ELLs we still provide targeted intervention in their integrated ENL. This might include literacy focus and also developing better writing skills. In addition, former ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL time for up to two years after exiting. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs already modify instruction to accommodate each student’s individual needs as specified in their IEPs. All teachers learn how to incorporate ELL techniques with the modifications and differentiation needed to follow the curriculum. All teachers incorporate supplementary texts in a variety of mediums to support our students. The ENL teacher, uses sheltered instruction and makes modifications to both curricula in order to cater to the language needs of ELLs and students with disabilities. He/she modifies worksheets and handouts for students so they have simplified language, are easy to read, and include graphic organizers when applicable. Sentence starters and sentence structures are also given to outline the information and teach and develop organization techniques that aid in comprehension. Since ELLs are required to read the same texts, they are given visuals, audio books, graphic novel versions, and any other visual or auditory supports available. The ENL teacher when appropriate individually conferences with students for one on one support to ensure the ELL and SWD are comprehending the content and making progress. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We meet the needs of all SWDs by providing the different services required. Each student’s schedule for services is coordinated to maximize instructional time in core subject classes. In order to place these students in the appropriate setting, we first look at NYSENLAT scores, NYS test scores, and grades from sending schools. We then look at their IEPs to see which setting of the least restrictive environment has been mandated for each respective student. We program the student's schedule such that we are meeting the requirements as stated on their IEPs as well as foster English acquisition. The ENL 1  teacher also provides the needed special education services to these students, which allows for specialized instruction to attain English proficiency. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention for core content are classes occurs during integrated ENL. The ENL teacher pushes in/co-teaches in the ELLs core content area class for the appropriate number of minutes mandated by NYS. For example, an expanding ELL receives 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Also a stand alone 40 minute intervention block that meets three times a week, which is targeted towards ELLs who need the additional support and are mandated to receive stand alone ENL minutes. Targeted intervention in core content area class is provided to meet the needs of each ELL, depending on a variety of factors such as each student's language acquisition progress and content area knowledge needs. Integrated ENL occurs during class time. The ENL teacher, works with content area teachers to create appropriate interventions and scaffolds for ELLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year of 2017-18, with the added staff, we anticipate having more ELL support for general education teachers to be able to make more modifications for ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have never had a bilingual program at HPCMS. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs at HPCMS are afforded equal access to all school programs. They are enrolled in the same academic programs as their peers based on their assessments and data. All of the following programs are offered to students by individual teachers with multiple fliers and emails being sent home to parents and guardians to promote attendance to these programs. Before school, during lunch and after school tutoring is offered to all students. We have partnerships with two different after school programs. The first is 82nd Street Academics which provide students with homework help, college prep as well as a student choice of extracurricular activities which include dance, chess, art, cheerleading, etc. The second after school program is Achieve Now which is geared towards students who are struggling in their core subject classes and receive tutoring and additional lessons from the core content area teachers in a small group setting. In addition to the two after school programs mentioned above there are before and after school programs that support extracurricular activities. Many ELLs are encouraged to participate in these activities which include sports and clubs such as Mighty Milers, CHAMPS sports teams, chess, spirit band, etc. During various points in the year, we will be offering Saturday School tutoring sessions. ELLs and SWDs will be strongly encouraged to attend. As the years progress, HPCMS plans on adding more curricular and extracurricular activities available to all students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ENL instruction at Hunter’s Point Community Middle School entails the most recent and effective pedagogical techniques. Instruction is given using varied language acquisition methods such as visuals and manipulatives, Total Physical Response (TPR), technology, authentic materials, and graphic organizers for scaffolded writing. Technology used in the classroom includes the SmartBoard and Elmo Document Camera to aid and support in direct instruction. Computers are also available to students for work in all content areas. Instructional materials are similar for all subgroups of ELLs; however, native language materials such as translated texts are available for beginner students. Leveled texts are also available for each subgroup, depending on their reading level. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2  Bilingual dictionaries are available for students. In addition, translated texts in their native language are available for students when needed, but often not required. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. At Hunter’s Point Community Middle School, students are transitioning from elementary school where they only had one teacher for all subjects and remained in the same room. In 6th grade, they must adapt to having specialized teachers for each content area and traveling from room to room. All support and resources are grade appropriate for the middle school level. All resources and materials available correspond to middle school (11-13 year olds) interests. Texts may be leveled at grades below their current grade level; however, the material is still age appropriate regardless of lexile level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? HPCMS is collocated with a high school (Academy for Careers in TV and Film) and a District 75 school (The Riverview School). However each school is on a separate floor and therefore ENL resources and materials are not shared amongst the three schools and ELLs have minimal to no contact with students from the other two schools. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At this time, we do not have any activities available to assist newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year. For new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year, the ENL teacher would invite these students to their Cre which is an advisory group. This interest-based advisory group allows students to learn about other cultures and is also a great opportunity for the ELL to continue to be supported by his/her ENL teacher. If the LAP team deems that the newly enrolled ELL is having a hard time adjusting the school counselor will provide assistance for the student and the parent coordinator will remain in consistent contact with the family. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer Spanish language classes in 7th and 8th grade. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ELL coordinator and the ENL instructors are members of NYSTESOL and will be attending any professional development available. Both have also attended the Nuts and Bolts for ENL compliance. In addition, the ELL teachers meets with the content are teachers weekly to suggest scaffolding and differentiation techniques specific for ELLs and students with disabilities. Hunter’s Point Community Middle School is also part of this year’s Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI), which focuses on literacy development for middle school students. There has been and will be continuous professional development on implementing the vocabulary focused program that crosses all content areas called Word Generation. Additionally, various 3  content area teachers at HPCMS have attended workshops for the Reading Apprenticeship program that promotes reading, which will also have continuous professional development throughout the year. The Literacy Coach who attends all of the literacy program workshops is always available to give feedback and suggestions for literacy development, especially for teachers of ELLs and students with disabilities. At HPCMS, we also have weekly professional development activities. The weekly meetings not only include data assessment, but also how to make necessary modifications and differentiation techniques for ELLs and students with disabilities. The ELL coordinator has to bi-weekly meetings department meetings with his fellow ENL instructor and has a tri-weekly meeting with the principal/assistant principal to discuss the needs of ELLs, and also meets when need with the guidance counselor, and other non-pedagogical staff members who work with ELLs and students with disabilities. The parent coordinator and ATS staff have also attended professional development on how to properly program ELLs via ATS. Also the ELL coordinator and the literacy coach arranges for professional development that is appropriate for all staff geared to educating teachers on how to effectively teach ELLs in their class. As the Common Core Learning Standards becomes an integral part in curriculum development, teachers at HPCMS are well-versed and apply standards in all lessons. The ENL teacher is already familiar with the standards; however, support is constantly given. During the weekly staff meetings, all staff at Hunter’s Point Community Middle School discusses our unified mastery-based grading system. We base our standards from the CCLS and other 6-8th grade curriculum standards. In addition, lead teachers offer support in the form of professional development for instruction of best practices and act as mentors to offer support, instructional resources, and model the instruction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. When CTLE courses that provide ELL-specific professional development are made available, the ELL coordinator provides the information about the course in a weekly newsletter for all staff to view and then attend if they are able to. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? HPCMS has parent-teacher conferences, known as “Student Led Conferences”, three times during the year. During this time, the ENL teachers meet with parents. In addition, the ENL teachers use parent-family outreach time to contact parents as necessary to discuss goals, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Content area teachers also invite the ENL teacher to any meetings they have in relation to the ELL. Translation and Interpretation services are available on an as needed basis. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. HPCMS has very active parent involvement. Our Parent Teacher Association meets biweekly. All situations allow for parents of ELLs and parents of non-ELLs to foster relationships. In addition, our Parent Coordinator, reaches out to all parents consistently and sends out the HPCMS weekly newsletter to communicate information. The Parent Coordinator is bilingual in English and Spanish and is available at all PTA meetings and school celebrations to translate. Full translation is available in all languages at parent teacher conferences. Paraprofessionals on staff also speak Spanish, Bengali, Hindi, and the ENL teacher, who speaks Spanish are all available for translation. 4  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Overall ELLs at HPCMS are integrated with their peers and have the necessary support from their ENL instructor via integrated ENL and Stand Alone ENL (when necessary). The ENL instructors, the core content area teachers, principal/assistant principal, guidance counselor, parent coordinator and school aides all work very closely together to ensure the needs of our ELLs are met. 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sarah Goodman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Hunter's Point Community M.S. School DBN: 30Q291 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Sarah Goodman Title Principal Kristen Shuart Assistant Principal Mildred Montalvo Parent Coordinator Aida Chimelis ENL/Bilingual Teacher Paul Cynamon Parent Seam Rosenberg Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Gayathri Iyer School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Dimitra Munoz Other Social Worker Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/13/17 6/13/17 6/13/17 6/13/17 6/13/17 6/13/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 6/13/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 6/13/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q291 School Name: Hunter's Point Community M.S. Superintendent: Composto The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Hunter's Point Community Middle School uses information gathered for the Language Allocation Policy (LAP) and the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) to determine the language needs of our families who have children recently enrolled in the NYCDOE. For students already in the system, we use ATS to gather information about the primary language spoken at home. This information is included in the HPCMS Student Master List spreadsheet accessible by all of the staff. In addition, we send home Blue Emergency Cards to be completed by the family in order to confirm their preferred oral and written language of communication. New information gathered is updated on the spreadsheet. Using data gathered from ATS of the home languages of our families, it was found that the majority of the non-English speaking families speak Spanish at home with 26% of our school population. The other languages with more than 1 student speaking the language include Arabic (2%), Bengali (2%), Chinese (1%), Korean (2%), and 8  Nepali (1%). The other home languages where only one student speaks the language are: French, Gujarati, Hatiian Creole, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Mandarin, Philipino, Portuguese, Romanian, Ukrainian, and Urdu. Any forms sent home to those who do not speak English or Spanish at home, we try to provide translations in their home languages as necessary when specifically requested. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The most preferred languages are Spanish and English; however, languages that have been preferred are French, Gujarati, Hatiian Creole, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Mandarin, Philipino, Portuguese, Romanian, Ukrainian, and Urdu. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All documents sent home are sent with Spanish and English. The documents include a variety of school culture, academic, and announcement related information. Such documents include, but are not limited to permission slips, announcements, etc. These documents are distributed throughout the year. 9  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We have parent-teacher conferences in November, March, and June. During this time, we have formal Student-Led Conferences and parents meet with staff at this time. All staff who speak the native language are available for translation during this time as needed. If they are not available, the Translation and Interpretation Services will be contacted. In addition, we disseminate parent-facing documents frequently and will request Translation and Interpretation services on an as needed basis. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 0  All parents of students at HPCMS are provided with a copy of the Parents' Bill of Rights and Responsibilities. We maintain a list of parents who have requested translations and send home information in the requested native language. Since the majority of parents speak Spanish at home, most information is also distributed in Spanish. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? To gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services, we give parents a survey at the end of the year that will include a related question. We will focus on parents that are of all cultures and languages in order to gather feedback and best practices regarding our Translation and Interpretation services. 1 
