 24Q293 School Name: CIVIC LEADERSHIP ACADEMY Principal: PHUONG NGUYEN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 24Q293 Civic LeadershipAcademy 3424000011293 9-12 45-10 94th Street, Elmhurst, NY 11373 7182711487 Phone Number: 7182713408 Fax: Susan LaGreca slagreca@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: PhuongNguyen Janice Lavaute Iris Flores-Salazar Amanda Hunter Gabriela Pena Natalie Rodriguez Christian Galicia Rosales CBO Representative: n/a Geographical District: 24 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street Room 504 Brooklyn, NY 11201 rcintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 923 5124 Phone Number: 718 923 5145 Fax:   Field Support Center (FSC) Affinity Group – New Visions FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 718-935-5941 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Phuong Nguyen Janice LaVaute Iris Flores-Salazar n/a Gabriela Pena Natalie Rodriguez Christian Galicia Rosales n/a Rosario Seguro Sun JungLee *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Amanda Hunter Jimmy Ma n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Member/ Parent Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission: Section 4: CEP Overview Civic Leadership Academy fosters the academic success, personal growth, and social development of our 9-12 grade students through service to their communities. Our college preparatory curriculum uses the real world as a classroom in which students develop as leaders who take initiative, solve problems, work as a team, and   demonstrate their abilities while addressing real community needs. The community is our textbook, helping to expand our students’ academic and leadership skills as they become future leaders of the world around them. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Civic Leadership Academy is a small high school in Elmhurst, Queens currently serving 586 students in grades 9-12. We offer a college preparatory program with an emphasis on youth development through service learning. Our commitment is to meeting the diverse learning needs of our students and helping them excel in all academic areas. Our three core values – commitment to community, learning and advocacy – promote the social, emotional and academic development of our students by helping them become independent, critical thinkers who are assets to their communities. We have high expectations for our students, and communicate them by clearly identifying learning outcomes, providing educational experiences at the appropriate level of challenge, and using data from student work, interim assessments, and standardized tests to inform instruction. In this way, we translate our expectations into learning experiences that are concrete, promote thinking, and aligned with the school’s mission. Our partnerships with Child Center of NY, Inc. and New Visions for Public Schools support our goal of providing students with quality opportunities to engage in work that contributes to the health of the community. We believe that using the community as a textbook offers our students opportunities to reinforce and extend their learning beyond the physical boundaries of the school. Programs for 2018-2019: As we work to further develop the college and career readiness of the students in our school, we are continuing our participation in the AP for All program, which provides support as we increase the AP course offerings for this campus. This year, our expanded offerings include AP Environmental Studies, as well as AP ELA Language, AP ELA Literature, AP Calculus AB, AP Biology, and AP US History. As we are committed to increasing the opportunities for students to take an AP class, other schools on the campus are offering AP Computer Science and a College Now ELA course, courses which are available to all students on the campus. Our students now have the opportunity to take multiple AP courses across all the content areas (ELA, math, science, social studies). Our partnership with CUNY through their College Now program continues and has expanded to several schools including Queens College, John Jay College, and Hunter College where students have the opportunity to take college courses and earn college credits for free. In addition, our students will continue to intern at the Hall of Science as Student Explainers and participate in other internships as we expand our internship opportunities for our students. While our participation in Algebra for All concluded with the 2017-18 school year, we continue to offer an additional period in Algebra instruction for our students enrolled in Algebra 1 so that they can have more time to engage in application problems, which is aligned with the model recommended by Algebra for All. This year we are adopting ALEKS adaptive math program as an additional support for all math topics and concepts. This year, our participation in College Access for All will continue our focus on ensuring that every one of our students graduate with an individualized college and career plan, and know how to access resources that support them in creating and pursuing that plan. We are also focused on helping students develop the foundational skills that are necessary for success in college by having all ninth and tenth graders participate in Elevate, a six session study skills program. Moreover, we have established a Read 180 program to increase the literacy skills of our special education students. 0  The 2017-18 school year has revealed that many of our students, especially the 9th graders, need more support in the area of their social emotional development. As a a result, we are implementing the Peer Group Connection-High School program. Our goal for this program is to not only train and inspire our young adults to become engaged leaders who can positively influence their peers, but to also increase the level of connection that 9th grade students have with the school. We believe that if the 9th graders feel more connected to the school and supported with their social emotional needs, their academic performance will improve. To expand this connection, we are collaborating with Generation Citizen, a program that teaches students how to be positive change agents in their community. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Analysis of the data for our SPED show that our students in the ICT setting consistently outperform students in the self contained program. Moreover, the majority of the ENL students who also receive special education services are currently off track. Although a significant percentage of our IEP students are currently off track, we have a proven track record of supporting these students so that they graduate on time with either a Regents or local diploma. Ten out of twelve IEP students in the Class of 2018, earned a Regents (6) or a Local (4) diploma and 100% of English Language Learners, two of whom also have an IEP, graduated on time with a Regents diploma. Our criteria for determining whether our students are on track to graduate are based on the number of credits, at least 11, and exams that students have accrued each year. Students are expected to earn at least 33 credits, and complete their Regents exam requirements by the end of 11th grade. All groups of students are held to the same standard and are expected to earn the requirements of at least a Regents diploma. As a result, the pass grade for a Regents exam is set at 65. We only consider other diploma options in the Spring semester of senior year as a last resort. The data for students in the subgroups are as follows: Students with IEPs Recommended Program ICT Self Contained SETTS/ Related Services Only 3 Alternate Assessment 6 Total # of Students # of Students on Track 60 20 30 (50%) 4 (20%) 3 (100%) n/a Current ENL Students ENL Only ENL + SPED ENL + SPED (Alternate Assessment) 2 Total # of Students # of Students on Track 10 22 5 (50%) 2 (8%) n/a As stated previously, students in the ICT sections are more than twice as likely to graduate on time than students in self contained sections. The results of the ENL students are similar to those of the special education students. Students who are ENL only are more than 4 times as likely to graduate on time than those who are ENL and SPED. 1  The majority of the students in these subgroups are not on track mostly due to Regents exams. As a result, this year we have implemented programs that support students' literacy and numeracy development in order to help them learn the content necessary to pass these exams. We believe that the programs that we have in place, both new and established, will help us achieve the goal of having all our students succeed at CLA. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on the feedback we received from various data sources like the Quality Review, School Quality Guide, the School Survey, and the Principal Practice Observations (PPO), we performed well in the areas of Supportive Environment (5B) and Effective School Leadership (5D). Every student is individually programmed so that he/she gets the support needed to stay on track and graduate on time. Our graduation rate for the class of 2018 was 92%, with 10 out of 12 of our students with IEPs earning a Regents (6 students) or Local (4 students) diploma, and 100% of English Language Learners (3 students) graduating on time with a Regents diploma. In addition, our school survey shows that 66% (Borough Average: 63%, City Average: 64%) of the students believe that the teaching staff at the school gives them extra help when they need it. This past year, we continued to make strides in creating a robust college culture. In particular we have focused our efforts to improve our performance in the college and career readiness metrics (CCR and CCPCI). As part of our participation in the College Access for All program, we created and implemented schoolwide grade specific workshops that were presented to students in September (beginning of Fall term) and February (end of Fall term, beginning of Spring term). This helped create a culture in which many students are interested in taking higher level rigorous courses such as advanced placement and Regents Algebra 2, Chemistry, and Physics. Our 2017-2018 School Survey result in the area of Rigorous Instruction of the Framework Element Scores was a 4.01, compared to 3.93 in 2017 and 3.94 in 2016. The feedback from the PPO focused on our need to help students become more independent learners, and we continue to develop our curriculum and instruction so that individual learning needs are targeted more effectively. We will continue our work to standardize instructional practices so that students receive consistently rigorous work across all classrooms. Moreover, we will focus on developing the college culture at the school with a particular focus on student independence and oral and written communication skills. Another 2018-2019 school year focus is ensuring that our lowest third subgroup meets the college readiness benchmarks and ha access to college and career readiness courses. We believe development in these three areas will be our biggest leverage points for preparing our students for the world beyond high school. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q293 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 529 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 8 11 19 11 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 47 19 26 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 76.0% % Attendance Rate 72.8% % Reduced Lunch 5.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 66.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 6.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.25 0% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 96% 93% 94.0% 22.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 113 112 89.4% 3.2% 18.5% 6.4% 12.5% 8.5% 4 23% 6.3 N/A N/A 98% 95% 88.4% 27% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Triangulation of all the data sources from our needs assessment in the area of Rigorous Instruction show a downward trend in our graduation rates. Our theory of action is that if we increase the number of students who are deemed college and career ready, we can ensure that at least 90% of our students will graduate on time. 1) Strengths Relative to this Framework: According to the School Quality Snapshot, there was an increase in the percentage of students who graduate college ready by meeting the CUNY standards for avoiding remedial classes . Analysis of College and Career Readiness Data: Class of / Cohort College Ready based on Meeting CUNY Benchmark of 75+ on ELA Regents and 70+ on Math Regents Class of 2017/ Cohort S Class of 2018/ Cohort T 66% 76% Analysis of 2017-2018 School Survey According to the 2017-2018 School Survey, in the area of Rigorous Instruction, there has been a trend of growth in the both the Framework Element Scores (4.01 in 2018 vs. 3.93 in 2017) and in the Survey Element Scores (4.03 in 2018 vs. 3.71 in 2017). Further analysis of the student responses show that:  79% of students say that teachers want students to become better thinkers, not just memorize things. (Borough Average: 76%, City Average: 67%)  59% of students say that teachers ask difficult questions in class. (Borough Average: 59%, City Average: 57%)  61% of students say they are challenged in their classes. (Borough Average: 57%, City Average: 57%) 4   84% of students say their classes at school make them think critically. (Borough Average: 79%, City Average: 79%)  88% of students say that they are learning a lot in their classes at their school to prepare them for the next level or grade. (Borough Average: 85%, City Average: 85%)  84% of students know what their teachers wants them to learn in class. (Borough Average: 81%, City Average: 80%) While our scores show that we are improving in the area of rigorous instruction and meeting citywide and borough averages with positive student responses, there is still room for improvement, especially in academically challenging students in the classroom. 2)Priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this framework element: While the % of students who graduate deemed college ready based on CUNY benchmarks have increased from the Class 2017 to Class of 2018, we are concerned about the slight decrease in the graduation rate from Class of 2018 compared to the Class of 2017. Careful review of the Class of 2019 shows that we have an anticipated graduation rate of 92%. Analysis of Academic Data The following tables were generated based on analysis of transcripts (as of June 2018) and using the New Visions Data Portal. Class of / Cohort Class of 2017/ Cohort S Class of 2018/ Cohort T Class of 2018/ Cohort U College Ready based on Meeting CUNY Benchmark of 75+ on ELA Regents and 70+ on Math Regents 88% (Anticipated based on 15/116 students being off track) 66% 76% Currently 65% Graduation Rate 96% 92% Grade Level / Cohort Total # in Cohort Total # of Students Meeting CUNY Benchmarks for College Readiness (CCR) in both Math (70+) and ELA (75+) Total # of Students Meeting CCR in Math (70+ on Math Regents) but not ELA Total # of Students Meeting CCR in ELA (75+ on ELA Regents) but not Math Grade 12/ Cohort U 116 + 1 alternate assessment 75 (65% of cohort) 23 Grade 11/ Cohort V 142 Grade 10/ Cohort W 151 21 2 87 (61% of cohort) 109 (72% of cohort) 15 0* *Our students do not usually take the ELA Regents until their junior year. 0* *Our students do not usually take the ELA 5  Grade 9/ Cohort X 184 0 Regents until their junior year. 0* 27* (32% of cohort) Many students will take their Algebra 1 Regents in June 2019. *Our students do not usually take the ELA Regents until their junior year. The data shows that currently 65% of cohort U (Class of 2019) are deemed college ready based on CUNY benchmarks for ELA and Math Regents exams. 61% of cohort V, 72% of cohort W, and 32 % of cohort X have already met the benchmark in math. The majority of students in cohort V will be scheduled to take the ELA regents by June 2019. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of students who have met (Class of 2019 and 2020) or on track to meet (Class of 2021 and 2022) CUNY benchmarks for college and career readiness in both ELA and math will increase to be at least 70% of each cohort. On track to meet CUNY benchmarks will be defined as meeting CUNY benchmarks in math for the 9th and 10th grade students as our students do not usually take the ELA regents until the end of their junior year. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Conduct grade specific workshops for students to discuss the following topics: Students Sept. 2018, Feb. 2019 Teachers, Administrators, Guidance Counselors Importance of College and Career Readiness  Graduation Requirements   College and Career Ready Benchmarks  Post Secondary Plans Participate in the Peer Group Connection-High School Program to promote more connectedness to school, develop leadership skills, and better decision making. Use ELEVATE to provide study skills workshops to both 9th and 10th grade students. Training provided to both teachers and parents to help support study skills presented to students. September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 All 9th grade Students, selected 11th and 12th grade All 9th and 10th Grade Students; Parents and Teachers Teachers, Students, Administrators, Dean, Guidance Counselor Teachers and Administrators Revise and share a map of the Pathways to Advanced Placement courses 9 -12 to inform parents and students about the coursework needed to take AP courses. Parents, Students August 2018-Sept. 2018 Administrators, Teachers, Guidance Counselors Identify grade level benchmarks for both College and Career Readiness focused on the CRI and CCPCI, but also include career and college choice exploration. Students Sept. 2018, Feb. 2019 Teachers, Administrators, Guidance Counselors Conduct workshops for parents that are targeted for each grade to explain the criteria for college and career readiness and show them ways in which they can support their child's success in school. Parents Sept. 2018-May 2019 Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Administrators Establish a Homework Help Room where students can get extra help during lunch and before and after school. Students Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, CBO (Child Center of NY) 7  Participate in NYCDOE Equity Programs to increase teacher capacity to address subgroups. Teachers -College Access for All -AP for All Summer 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator Program additional instructional time for Algebra 1 students to increase learning time to 300 minutes of instruction per week. Students Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Program push-in sections in content areas to support ENL students: ENL Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, Guidance Counselors ENL Teachers, Administrators, Guidance Counselors 9th Grade ENL Biology push-in 10th Grade ENL Global History push-in 9th-12th grade ENL ELA elective taught by dually certified ELA/ESL teacher Program 11th and 12th grade students for support classes in CC Algebra 1 and CC ELA to retake the exam to achieve a 70 or higher on the Algebra 1 exam and/ or 75 or higher on the CC ELA exam. Work with special education ELA and math teachers to align instruction between self-contained and ICT sections. Create a Lowest Third Inquiry Team to track and monitor progress of our lowest third students. This inquiry team will also research intervention and support strategies to help our lowest third students meet our their goals Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Guidance Counselor Teachers Students Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators ELA Seminar Memoir writing class to support literacy development of ENL and SPED students. ENL/SPED Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, ENL Coordinator Implement Read 180 Program and ALEKS to improve numeracy, reading, and literacy skills of our self contained SPED students in 9th and 10th grade. SPED students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Starting in July 2018, we will increase and improve how we communicate with our parents and families through parent emails, redesigning school website, and creation of a parent newsletter. The goal is to ensure we more explicitly highlight our educational program and school wide goals for the 2018-2019 school year to our families. 8  We will hold topic and grade specific workshops for parents on what it means to be college and career ready and how to best support their child at home. Guidance counselors assisted by the parent coordinator will conduct grade-specific workshops for parents each semester. Timeframe Grade(s) Topic Sept. 2018 9-12 College and Career Readiness How to advocate for your child? Lead Personnel Guidance Counselor Oct. 2018 9-12  How can I monitor the progress of my child?  How does my child learn best?  What are the best ways of communicating with your child's teachers?  What additional resources are there to help support my child academically and socially? Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator Oct. 2018 11-12 Engage Study Skills Nov. 2018 9-12 College Night Dec. 2018 12 Feb. 2019 11-12 FInancial Aid Workshop Building a Resume for College Success Engage Program Staff Parent Coordinator, Teachers Guidance Counselor Guidance Counselor Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Resources:  Houghton, Mifflin, Harcourt 9 th grade Reading Series and Resources  Common Core Standards for ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies  Big Ideas Math Textbooks for Algebra 1 and Algebra 2  EngageNY modules for 9-12 ELA and Math  New Visions Data Portal  New Visions study groups in Living Environment and Earth Science  National Math and Science Initiative (NMSI) Units  AP for All professional development and teacher support services  College Board Advanced Placement curricula  Outside professional development on targeted instructional areas  Elevate Study Skills Workshops  Glencoe ALEKS adaptive math program  HMH Read 180 program Budget Resources:  Per session for teachers and administrators  Per diem to support teacher attendance at outside professional development and intervisitations 9  Funding for Elevate (Study Skills), two Read 180 classrooms, ALEK subscription for all students Human Resources  Teachers  Parent Coordinator  Guidance Counselors   Administrators F-Status Internship Coordinator Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point Benchmark: By February 2019, the administration will monitor progress, by cohort, made towards meeting CUNY benchmarks by analyzing January 2019 Regents results. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Regents exam scores,  CRI percentage at the end of the Fall semester, Spring semester   Credit Accumulation at the end of Fall and Spring semesters SAT Scores Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the needs assessment, triangulation of all the data sources from in the area of Supportive Environment, our theory of action is that if we get to know our students better in terms of their social and academic needs (assessment), we will be able to better meet their needs and ultimately increase the number of students who are on track and college and career ready. 1) Strengths Relative to this Framework: Analysis of 2017-2018 School Survey: Our students continue to voice that they feel safe at our school. Analysis of the school survey responses show that 93% responded positively on the school survey with reference the questions asking if they felt safe at their school. Analysis of Academic Data: While a significant percentage of our IEP students are currently off track, our proven track record of supporting our IEP students so that they do graduate on time with either a Regents or local diploma, is evidenced by the Class of 2018, in which 10 out of 12 of our students with IEPs earned a Regents (6) or a Local (4) diploma. In addition 100% of English Language Learners graduated on time with a Regents diploma with 2 of them also having IEPs. 2)Priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this framework element: Analysis of 2017-2018 Student Perception Survey Analysis of the Panaroma Student Perception Survey shows that having favorable student responses to questions around classroom engagement remain an area of growth. Our teachers received a 47% favorable (City Average: 49%) responses in the area of Classroom Engagement and 72% favorable (City Average: 67%) in Classroom Climate. Analysis of 2017-2018 School Survey Analysis of the school survey responses show that while our students feel safe in our school, they still require not only academic supports but require additional support in meeting their social emotional needs. This is highlighted by the survey responses from both teachers and students. Though 93% of students feel safe in the school, 47% of students feel that their teachers support them when they are upset. Analysis of Academic Data 1  Analysis of transcripts (as of June 2018) and using the New Visions Data Portal, we find that there is a greater percentage of students in the 9th and 10th grade who are considered off track either based on credits, Regents exams, or both. Our criteria for determining whether our students are on track to graduate on time are:  Entering 10th grade, the student has earned at least 11 credits and passed 2 Regents exams  Entering 11th grade, the student has earned at least 22 credits and passed at least 3 Regents exams  Entering 12th grade, the student has earned at least 33 credits and passed at least 4 Regents exams By the end of 12th grade, the student has earned 44 credits in the required content areas and passed at least 5 Regents exams. We expect all of our students to earn a Regents diploma and passing a Regents exam is based on a score of 65 or higher. For Academic Year 2018-2019 Grade Level in 2018-19/ Cohort Total # in Cohort # of Students Off Track # of Students Off Track with IEPs # of Students off Track with IEP and Identified as ELL. # of Students Off Track Identified as ELL. Grade 10/ Cohort W Grade 11/ Cohort V Grade 12/ Cohort U 146 148 122 26 26 15 17 14 8 6 3 4 2 1 1 The data shows that about 18% of our 9th and 10th graders finished the 2017-2018 academic year off track based on our Regents and credit requirements mentioned above. Based on OORS incident reports for 2017-2018, about a third of the incidents (15 out of 42) reported were related 9th graders for minor disciplinary infractions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of ninth grade students who will be on track to earn a Regents diploma as measured by the minimum accumulation of 11 credits and the completion of at least 2 Regents exam will increase by 5%. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Participate in the Peer Group Connection-High School Program to promote more connectedness to school, develop leadership skills, and better decision making. Summer Bridge Program for all incoming 9th graders Use ELEVATE to provide study skills workshops to both 9th and 10th grade students. Training provided to both teachers and parents to help support study skills presented to students. Administer periodic diagnostic assessments using sections of Regents exams to assess students progress in meeting standards and benchmarks of respective Regents curricula. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018-June 2018 Teachers, Administrators, Dean, Guidance Counselor August 2018 Teachers, Administrators Sept. 2018-April 2019 Teachers, Administrators All 9th grade Students, selected 11th and 12th grade Students All 9th Grade Students All 9th and 10th Grade Students; Parents and Teachers All Students November All Teachers 2018 January 2019 March 2019 May 2019 Design and administer informal student surveys to assess our progress towards the following School Survey Questions/Statements (Lowest performing in 2017-2018) All Students November 2018, January 2019 Teachers, Administrators Program push-in sections in content areas to support ENL students:  9th Grade ENL Biology push-in  9th-12th grade ENL ELA elective taught by dually certified ELA/ESL teacher ENL Students August 2018- June 2019 Administrators, ELA and ENL Teachers 3  Participate in professional development targeted around building teachers' understanding of culturally responsive practices in the classroom. Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 New Visions Instructional Specialist, Conduct scholarship meetings each marking period to discuss the progress of students with special education teachers and to plan further interventions if needed. Teachers PD Organizations, Administrators Administrators, Teachers October 2018, December 2018, January 2019, March 2019, May 2019 Meeting with guidance counselors after each marking period to discuss needs and supports for students at risk of failing. Issue progress to graduation letters each marking period to all students to track their progress. Promote and encourage students to use the Homework Help Room during their lunch periods to get tutoring and/or help with assignments in math or ELA if needed. All students Oct. 2018, Dec. 2018, Jan. 2019, March 2019, May 2019 All students Oct. 2018, Dec. 2018, Jan. 2019, March 2019, May 2019 All students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Guidance Counselors Administrators, Guidance Counselors Math, ELA Teachers Develop clubs during lunch periods to strengthen and increase enrichment programs for students. All students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Teachers Create grade specific inquiry teams to develop intervention plans for all at risk students At risk students Sept.2018-June 2019 Conduct transcript review workshops with students three times (September 2018, February 2019, June 2019) a year to monitor progress and create/adjust action plan for staying on track. All Students September 2018, February 2019, June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Guidance Counselors Administrators, Teachers, Guidance Counselors Meet individually with struggling students after each marking period to create an action plan to stay on track. Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Guidance Counselors, Teachers, Administrators 4 Conduct workshops for parents on how to support their child academically and emotionally, as well as track their child's progress throughout the year. Students, Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Administrators Conduct workshops for students and parents on teen issues Students, Parents Sept.2018-June 2019 Guidance Counselors, Implement Read 180 Program to improve reading and literacy skills of our self contained SPED students in 9th and 10th grade. SPED students Implement ALEKS program to improve numeracy skills of students. Increase targeted support for students taking Algebra 1. All students in self contained sections will have an additional 90 minutes of math instruction where they can work on skill building and application problems. Students SPED students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Administrators Teachers Teachers Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Starting in July 2018, we will increase and improve the modes of communication with our parents and families through parent emails, redesigning school website, and creation of a parent newsletter. The goal is to ensure we more explicitly highlight our educational program and school wide goals for the 2018-2019 school year to our families. We will hold topic and grade specific workshops to support parents in tracking and monitoring the progress of their child and provide them with additional resources for academic support. Guidance Counselors,assisted by the Parent Coordinator, will conduct grade-specific workshops for parents each semester. Timeframe Grade(s) Topic Sept. 2018 9 Oct. 2018 9-10 Graduation Requirements, College and Career Readiness, What is a high school transcript? Study Skills How to advocate for your child? Lead Personnel Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator ELEVATE Nov. 2018 9  How can I monitor the progress of my child?  How does my child learn best?  What are the best ways of communicating with your child's teachers? Parent Coordinator 5   What additional resources are there to help support my child academically and socially? Feb. 2019 9 Where does my child stand academically now? (Transcript Review) Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Resources:  Common Core Standards for ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies  EngageNY modules for 9-12 ELA and Math  Resources for AP courses, SAT Subject tests  New Visions resources for meeting diverse needs of students  National Math and Science Initiative (NMSI) Units 2017-18  College Board AP curricula  Outside professional development on targeted instructional areas  Peer Group Connection Curriculum  ELEVATE Study Skills curricula materials  HMH Read 180 program  Glencoe ALEKS adaptive math program  Human Resources: Special Education Teachers  Teachers   Paraprofessionals  Guidance Counselors  Parent Coordinator  Parents and/or Guardians Schedule Adjustments:  All 9th grade students will have physical education the same period, which will alternate with either music or art 2x a week. On Fridays, 9th graders will be meeting with Peer Group Leaders (11th and 12th grade mentors) for PGC designed activities.  Peer Group Leaders (student mentors) will have a leadership class with the Peer Group Advisors (12th grade ELA teacher and 9th grade guidance counselor). Budget Resources: Supervisor Per Session for supervision of before and after school programs  Teacher Per Session for before and after school Regents prep   Per Diem for teacher coverage during teacher intervisitations and participation in professional development  OTPS funding for professional development fees Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 6  X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. MidPoint Benchmark: By February 2019, the following benchmarks will be analyzed to identify progress toward the goal:  Transcript Analysis (9th graders should have a minimum of 6 credits by February 2019). It is expected that at least 85% of 9th graders should be on track by February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Transcripts from STARS Log of Guidance Support (excluding mandated counseling) OORS Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the triangulation of all the data sources from our needs assessment in the area of Collaborative Teachers, it is evident that teachers need more time and opportunities to engage in purposeful collaboration in grade levels teams in order to support all students in their progress toward graduation and achieving College and Career Readiness measures. Our theory of action is that by developing a grade team structure that requires teachers to engage in analysis of students academically at risk and through teacher directed PLCs on assessment and feedback for all students, teachers will have opportunities to work collaboratively to improve outcomes for all subgroups. 1) Strengths Relative to this Framework: The January 2016 NYC Quality review resulted in a score of Well Developed for indicator 4.2, How well do teachers work with each other. Analysis of Student Perception Survey ADVANCE Domain 3 data shows that 75% of ratings in component 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) were Effective or Highly Effective. This mirrors the favorable response rates from students on the Pedagogical Effectiveness questions from the 2017-2018 Student Perception survey, where 74% of students responded positively to “How often does this teacher give you feedback that helps you learn?” 2)Priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this framework element: However, according to the 2017-2018 NYC School Quality Guide, over the past three years Framework Element Scores for Collaborative Teachers have declined from 4.39 in the 2015-2016 school year to 4.02 in the 2017-2018 school year. This trend is echoed in the Survey Element scores with a score of 3.78 in the 2015-2016 school year decreasing to a 3.04 in the 2017-2018 school year. Analysis of 2017-2018 NYC School Survey Analysis of the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey responses of teachers shows that teachers feel that they collaborate with each other at similar rates to the borough and city. However, this collaboration is not credited with opportunities to engage in collaborative structures or professional development within in the school as indicated by a significantly lower rate than the borough and city in NYC School Survey questions related to the Quality of Professional Development Measure. Analysis of Academic Data 8  Analysis of students’ academic data shows that up to 17% of students in each cohort are off track in their progress toward graduation. Overall, the majority of students who are off track are struggling with credits and/or exams across content areas. Traditionally, interventions and progress monitoring for these students are the responsibility of the guidance department. Grade Level in 2018-19/ Cohort Total # in Cohort # of Students Off Track Grade 10/ Cohort W Grade 11/ Cohort V Grade 12/ Cohort U 146 148 122 26 26 1 Analysis of Professional Growth Analysis of ADVANCE data for the 2017-2018 school year shows that in Domain 4, 93% of ratings in 4e, Growing and Developing Professionally, were effective. However, NYC School Survey data shows a 47% positive response rate from teachers on the Quality of Professional Development, which is below the borough and city averages. While teachers have sought out and participated in professional development and welcome feedback from colleagues and supervisors, teachers’ opportunities to engage in professional learning beyond Monday Professional development and department team structures are limited. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students identified as off track will have multi-tiered individualized student intervention plans to monitor and support their progress, resulting in at least 5% of these students moving to the on-track list both in credits and Regents exams. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Refine teacher's knowledge of student sub groups at our school by sharing best practices for assessing students and providing actionable feedback. Create a Homework Help Center available to students during their lunch periods to support all students in all subjects and to provide additional support for ENL, SWD, and other high-need student subgroups' writing. Create grade level inquiry teams to develop intervention plans for all students identified as at risk. Create Professional Learning Communities to explore cultural responsive pedagogy, assessment, feedback and social-emotional development. Formation of a Lowest Third inquiry group to track, monitor, and support students students that are identified as in the lowest third and/ or at risk of not meeting grade level requirements. Participation in the NYCDOE Growth Mindset Series to develop expertise in growth-mindset strategies, including how they can be implemented in classroom instruction to improve students’ academic and personal behavioral outcomes, as well as school climate. Attendance Committee-track and monitor the attendance of all students. Provide support and interventions for students identified with attendance problems. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators Students, teachers Sept.2018 - June 2019 Administration, Teachers Teachers Teachers Sept.2018-June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Guidance Sept.2018-June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Guidance Lowest Third Sept.2018-June 2019 Administration, Teachers Teachers Sept.2018-June 2019 Administration, Teachers Teachers Sept.2018-June 2019 Administration, Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Starting in July 2018, we will increase and improve the modes of communication with our parents and families through parent emails, redesigning school website, and creation of a parent newsletter. The goal is to ensure we more explicitly highlight our educational program and school wide goals for the 2018-2019 school year to our families. 0  We will hold topic and grade specific workshops to support parents in tracking and monitoring the progress of their child and provide them with additional resources for academic support. Guidance Counselors,assisted by the Parent Coordinator, will conduct grade-specific workshops for parents each semester. Timeframe Grade(s) Topic Sept. 2018 9-12 Oct. 2018 9-10 Graduation Requirements, College and Career Readiness, Transcript Review (grades 10-12) Study Skills How to advocate for your child? Lead Personnel Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator ELEVATE Nov. 2018 9-12  How can I monitor the progress of my child?  How does my child learn best?  What are the best ways of communicating with your Parent Coordinator child's teachers?  What additional resources are there to help support my child academically and socially? Feb. 2019 9-12 Where does my child stand academically now? (Transcript Review) March 2019 9-12 How do I ensure my child stays motivated? April 2019 9-12 How can I make sure that my child ends the year strong? Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Resources:  Teacher resource books on writing across the content  Resource library of varied reading selections, fiction and non fiction  Mentor texts  Outside professional development on components of effective writing instruction Human Resources:  Administrators  Affinity Network Instructional Coaches  Parent Coordinator  ELA and Social Studies Teachers Budget Resources: 1   Teacher and Supervisor Per session for participation in inquiry team meetings. the development of documents and resources, parent workshops on content specific writing  Per Diem for coverage during internal and external classroom Intervisitations  OTPS for professional development funding, hiring of a math consultant, hiring of instructional support consultant Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point Benchmark: By February 2019, 100% of students identified as at risk of not being on track will have a multi-tiered intervention plan in place for the Spring 2019 term. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Transcript STARS Scholarship Reports (Marking Period Data Analysis) Log of Support from Grade Level Teams Log of Student Support from Guidance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Triangulation of the various data sources from the needs assessment shows that while there have been gains in our graduation, Regents, and College and Career Readiness metrics, meeting the needs and supporting all of our learners remains an area of focus. This is especially true since 19% of our population are students with disabilities (city average: 17%), with 4% being self contained (city average: 2%). Feedback from teachers and student performance from various subgroups show that there was a lack in coherency in our professional development plan for the 2017-2018 school year. As a result, our theory of action for 2018-2019 for Effective School Leadership, is that if the staff as a whole expands our understanding and implementation of culturally responsive pedagogy, we will better identify the needs of our students, and deliver instruction and supports to help all students be successful at CLA. 1) Strengths Relative to this Framework: Analysis of 2017-18 School Performance Dashboard:  Our graduation rate has remained above 90% for the past three years (92% for Class of 2018).  Our College Readiness Index has increased over the last three years from 55% (Class of 2016) to 82% (Class of 2018).  The percentage of students who have successfully completed approved college or career preparatory courses and exams has increased over the last three years from 43% (Class of 2016) to 71% (Class of 2018). 2)Priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this framework element: Analysis of ADVANCE Data: Analysis of ADVANCE data for the 2017-2018 school year shows that Domain 3, specifically components 3c (Engaging Students in Learning) and 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) remain areas of growth.  69% of ratings in component 3b (Questioning and Discussion) were Effective or Highly Effective.  65% of ratings in component 3c (Engaging Students in Learning) were Effective or Highly Effective.  75% of ratings in component 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) were Effective or Highly Effective. 3  Analysis of Academic Data: The following tables were generated based on analysis of transcripts (as of Sept. 2018) and using the New Visions Data Portal. Total # in Cohort Total # of students off track Total # of Students In School and City Lowest Third # of Students in the Lowest Third Considered Off Track 146 148 117 26 26 15 30 23 19 16 16 13 Grade Level in 2018-19/ Cohort Grade 10/ Cohort W Grade 11/ Cohort V Grade 12/ Cohort U Currently there are 72 students identified as the lowest third (grade 10-12). Review of transcripts (June 2018) show that of those 72 students, 45 students (62.5%) are considered on track to graduate with a Regents diploma. # Of Lowest Third SPED ENL SPED + ENL Grade/ Cohort Grade 10/ Cohort W 30 Grade 11/ Cohort V 23 Grade 12/ Cohort U 19 16 13 7 9 7 1 9 7 7 College and Career Readiness of Lowest Third Students: CCR is defined as meeting the CUNY Benchmark of achieving a 70+ on a CC Math Regents exam (or 65+ on Algebra 2) or 75+ on the CC ELA Regents. Currently, none of these students in grade 10-12 have met the CUNY benchmarks. Grade/ Cohort # of Lowest Third # of Students Off Tack # of Students in Lowest Third meeting CCR in ELA 0 # of Students in Lowest Third meeting CCR in both ELA and Math Grade 10/ Cohort W 30 Grade 11/ Cohort V Grade 12/ Cohort U 23 19 7 7 6 Analysis of 2017-2018 School Survey *Most students in this cohort have not taken ELA Regents yet. 0 *Most students in this cohort have not taken ELA Regents yet. 1 0 0 0 Analysis of the School Survey results show that there was a decrease in our performance in the Framework Element scores for Effective School Leadership (2.42 in 2018 vs. 3.03 in 2017). Although families responded favorably to 4  questions related to the leadership of the school, in contrast, responses from teachers were lower than borough and city averages. Analysis of 2017-2018 Student Perception Survey Analysis of the Panaroma Student Perception Survey shows that there was some improvement in favorable student responses to questions/ statements regarding pedagogical effectiveness.  74% responded favorably to the question “How often does this teacher give you feedback that helps you learn?” (74% in 2016-17).  77% responded favorably to the question “For this class, how clearly does this teacher present the information that you need to learn?” (78% in 2016-17).  68% responded favorably to the question “How well can this teacher tell whether or not you understand the topic?” (65% in 2016-17).  70% responded favorably to the question “How good is this teacher at teaching in the way you personally learn best?” (66% in 2016-17). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a collaborative team of teachers and administrators will design and deliver a coherent professional development focused on culturally responsive pedagogy and assessment resulting in a 5% increase in the performance of the students in the lowest third who are on track to graduate on time. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrators will engage in a book study around Courageous Conversations by Glenn Singleton with the Superintendent's team. Administrators Sept. 2018-June 2018 Administrators School faculty will engage in a book study around Culturally Responsive Teaching and the Brain by Zaretta L. Hammond. Teacher, Staff Sept. 2018- June 2018 Administration, Teachers Plan, develop, and implement a professional development for teachers and staff around assessment and culturally responsive pedagogy. Provide individualized support for our teachers based on their needs (data from IPCs and ADVANCE ratings). Supports include sending teachers to participate in professional development provided by Affinity, New Visions, Teacher's College, NYCDOE Showcase School Program, and other outside organizations. Teachers July 2018- June 2019 Administration, Teachers Teachers, Administrators Sept. 2018- June 2018 Teachers, Administration Participation in the NYCDOE Growth Mindset Series to develop expertise in growth-mindset strategies, including how they can be implemented in classroom instruction to improve students’ academic and personal behavioral outcomes, as well as school climate. Students, Teachers, Admin July 2018-June 2019 Administration, Teachers Lowest Third Inquiry Team will monitor and develop interventions for academic success for the lowest third and off track students at each of the grade bands. Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Teachers They will also be monitoring progress towards meeting CCR and CCPCI benchmarks. Conduct scholarship meetings each marking period with teachers to discuss the progress of students. Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teachers Encourage students to use the Homework Help Center during their lunch periods to get tutoring and/or help with assignments in math or ELA if needed. All Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 ELA, Math Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 6  Starting in July 2018, we will increase and improve the modes of communication with our parents and families through parent emails, redesigning school website, and creation of a parent newsletter. The goal is to ensure we more explicitly highlight our educational program and school wide goals for the 2018-2019 school year to our families. We will hold topic and grade specific workshops to support parents in tracking and monitoring the progress of their child and provide them with additional resources for academic support. Guidance Counselors,assisted by the Parent Coordinator, will conduct grade-specific workshops for parents each semester. Timeframe Grade(s) Topic Sept. 2018 9-12 Oct. 2018 9-10 Graduation Requirements, College and Career Readiness, Transcript Review (grades 10-12) Study Skills How to advocate for your child? Lead Personnel Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator ELEVATE Nov. 2018 9-12  How can I monitor the progress of my child?  How does my child learn best?  What are the best ways of communicating with your child's teachers?  What additional resources are there to help support my child academically and socially? Parent Coordinator Feb. 2019 9-12 Where does my child stand academically now? (Transcript Review) Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Resources:  New Visions resources for meeting diverse needs of students  Outside professional development on targeted instructional areas, Growth Mindset, Mastery-based learning, Cultural Competency  Peer Group Connection High School Curriculum Schedule Adjustments: Budget Resources:  Teacher Per Session for before and after school professional development and inquiry meetings   OTPS funding for supplies, consultants Supervisor Per Session for supervision of before and after school programs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 7  X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point Benchmark: By February 2019, 50% of students identified as in the lowest third and currently off track will have made measurable progress and be considered on track or almost on track. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School generated informal survey results   ADVANCE components 3d, 4e Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on triangulation of the data sources from our needs assessment in the area of Strong Family-Community Ties, we will work on increasing and improving modes of communication with parents and families and offering workshops targeted to the needs of each grade, in order to increase the number of parents who actively participate in school events. Parents are supportive of the school and the education that their children are receiving as shown by their 86% positive response to questions related to Outreach to Parents. They have the opportunity to participate in various school events like Shakespeare Faire, Community Fair, and chaperoning of school trips, however, responses to Parent Involvement questions were 5% below the city average at 75%. 1) Strengths Relative to this Framework: Analysis of 2017-2018 NYC School Survey:  95% of families say that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit their school.  88% of families say that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs.  94% of families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school.  97% of families say that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand.  74% of families say that they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school event. 2)Priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this framework element: In the 2017-18 school year, there was an 11% decrease in the response rate for the NYC School Survey to a 63% parent/guardian response rate (317 parent/guardian surveys received). Analysis of PCAR Reports: The PCAR reports shows that during the 2017-2018 school year there was an overall decrease in the number of parents at PA meetings. In 2017-18, the meetings with the highest attendance rate of parents and families were related to the college admissions process. In addition, at the November 2017 PTC, 248 of 535 families (46%) attended, but in March 2018 it decreased to 183 of 535 families (34%) attending. 9  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent participation at schoolwide parent events will increase by 10%, as measured by parent attendance to Meet the Teacher Night, Parent Teacher Conferences, and Promotion in Doubt Conferences. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Ensure that parent/ family contact information is current and up to date. This includes mailing address, telephone numbers, and emails in order to update ATS Biographical Information. Parents, Students June 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Parent Coordinator Participate in the College Access for All initiative professional development for school teams to articulate a schoolwide vision and action plan for post secondary success. Parents, Students and Teachers July 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, College Success Team Teachers Develop and share a map of the Pathways to Advanced Placement courses 9 -12 to inform parents and students about the coursework needed to take AP courses. Develop a Parent Education Curriculum Framework to align the content of monthly parent workshops, meetings and newsletters. Parents and Students All Parents Sept. 2018 Administrators Sept. 2018 Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, PA Executive Board, Teachers, Administrators Redesign of school website that is more user friendly and accessible to both students, parents, and staff. Develop and implement parent surveys to assess parent needs, to guide programming of parent workshops that are tailored to parents, and to evaluate the effectiveness of workshops attended translated into Spanish. Teachers, Parents, Students All Parents Sept. 2018-Nov. 2018 Sept. 2018, February 2019, May 2019 Administration and website coordinator (Teacher) Parent Coordinator, Provide grade and topic specific parent workshops on college readiness and the college application process in English and Spanish. All Parents Sept. 2017 - June 2018, Monthly Administration, Parent Coordinator, PA Executive Board Increase communication modes to inform families of meetings, resources available and workshops at the school through: Parents and Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator  Telephone messages home in English and Spanish.  Production of a Monthly Parent Newsletter in English and Spanish.  Telephone outreach to individual parents.   A redesigned school website. Increased social media presence. 1 At SLT Meetings discuss, develop and refine effective outreach methods and strategies to increase parent involvement in school functions. Parents Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Monthly Administration, Teachers, Parents, Students, Parent Coordinator, UFT Chapter Leader Increase the number of college trips for students and their families by: Students and Parents  Developing grade specific college visits from 9-12 to City, State, and Private colleges and universities.  Matching college visits in the 11th and 12th grade to entrance criteria and students transcripts and resumes. Hold biweekly parent "chat and chews" to discuss and support preparation for and completion of the college application process and the development of post secondary plans. Parents Sept. 2018, November 2018, March-May 2019 Guidance Counselors, Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, College Success Team Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. n/a Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Resources: School Messenger automated phone system School Website School Social Media: Facebook, Instagram, Twitter     9-12 College Handbook for Parents   Remind text messaging service School Newsletters Human Resources:  Parent Coordinator  Parent Association Executive Board  Guidance Counselors  Teachers  Administrative Team Budget Resources:  Teacher Per Session for development and facilitation of parent workshops, and supervision of broadcast club.  Supervisor Per Session for development, facilitation and supervision of parent workshops. 2   OTPS funding for transportation for college visits. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, the school will increase the participation of parents at the November Parent-Teacher Conference and at monthly Parent Association Meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PCAR reports from September 2018 -January 2019, CLA Social Media site analytics reports. Email communication analysis Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students not reading on grade level, students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ●Extra 45-minute period of instruction each week ● Whole class, small group, one-to one instruction ● Before, during, and after school ● Gradual Release of Responsibility Model ● Additional ELAseminar to support literacy skills ● Year-long Study Skills Programfor grades 9-10 ●Student Writing Center ● Lunch TimeTutoring ● Homework Help-Before and After School ● Response to Intervention Team ● Read 180 Program ● Saturday Regents Prep Program 4  Mathematics Students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities ● Extra 45-minute period of instruction each week ● Whole class, small group, one-to one instruction, peer tutoring ● Gradual Release of Responsibility Model ● Additional full-time support class in Algebra 1, Algebra 2 ● Before, during, and after school ● During lunch ● Saturdays during the Spring semester ● Tutoring ● Homework Help ● Response to Intervention Team ● Algebra 1, and Algebra 2 Regents Prep Program ●Algebra 1 Saturday Program ●Lunchtime Math Lab tutoring ● ALEKS Math Program ●Extra 45-minute period of instruction each week ● Whole class, small group, one-to one instruction, peer tutoring ● Gradual Release of Responsibility Model ● Tutoring ● Additional full-time support class in Living Environment ● Homework Help ● Response to Intervention Team ● Living Environment, Earth Science, Chemistry ● Before, during, and after school ● Saturdays during the Spring semester Science Students not reading on grade level, students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities, students missing required labs 5  Social Studies and Physics Regents Prep Program ● Year-long Study Skills Programfor grades 9-10 ●Extra 45-minute period of instruction each week ● Whole class, small group, one-to one instruction ● Before, during, and after school ● During lunch ●Gradual Release of Responsibility Model ● Additional full-time support class in Global History and US History Students not reading on grade level, students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students with chronic attendance/tardies, multiple detentions or suspensions, peer issues ● Small group During and after school ● Individual ● Tutoring ● Homework Help ● Student Success Team ● Year-long Study Skills Programfor grades 9-10 ● Two Guidance Counselors on staff ● At-risk and mandated counseling services provided by Guidance Counselor based on IEP and/or on an as-needed basis ● College Counseling provided by Guidance Counselor ● Peer mentor for grade 9 students ● Peer mediation facilitated by Dean 6  7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 19 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The services provided to the STH population are: information about the McKinney-Vento law and the rights of families, free lunch, tutoring/mentoring programs, Metrocard for free transportation, continued enrollment in the school, covering the costs associated with school activities, providing school supplies, gym uniform, field trip fees, and senior dues. The school will also provide counseling services and information about outside agencies that can provide additional support. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Once a vacancy is determined, it is posted on the NYCDOE Open Market system, and the hiring team works with their partners in the New Visions Talent Acquisition Team and at local universities to identify potential candidates. The team also searches the New Teacher Finder and Open Market for candidates. The hiring team screens the resumes and only considers applicants with the appropriate license. The hiring process in multi-tiered. It begins with the candidate being invited to an interview with the hiring team, which consists of teachers and administrators. If the candidate is strong, he/she is invited to do a short demo lesson and interview with administrators. During the demo lesson, students complete a “Student Evaluation Form” in which they rate the candidate in areas like content knowledge and relationship building, and then are asked to give their recommendation of whether the teacher should be hired for a position at the school. After the demo lesson, the candidate sits for an interview with the administrators to discuss the lesson and student evaluation forms. If the candidate seems like a strong fit for the school, then references and certifications are checked before he/she is offered the position. Teachers new to the school are supported in a variety of ways:  Mentoring program for first year teachers; "Buddy Coach" for teachers new to the school.  Orientation before the start of the school year.  Differentiated professional development based on the discussion from the Initial Planning Conference. meeting and teacher data, and observation data.  Collaborative planning time with teachers in the department and grade teams.  Participation in professional development both within and outside the school.  Continual and ongoing feedback through the observation cycle.  Classroom intervisitations and school visits.  Attendance at national instructional conferences based on school goals and budget availability. 0  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). A needs assessment for professional development is conducted at the beginning of the year to determine the overall goals for teacher development at the school. The needs assessment is based on a variety of data, including Regents pass rates, credit accumulation, data from teacher observation reports, and teacher goals. We use this data to align with the initiatives of the Department of Education to ensure an integrated approach to the professional development of the staff. All instructional staff members including the leadership team, teachers, and paraprofessionals are expected to participate in professional development. Teachers are organized into subject teams and they meet regularly to plan together, explore instructional strategies, analyze student work, and design curricula that align with the Common Core State Standards. Teachers are supported in their work by attending outside professional development and turn-keying the new learning to the rest of the staff. When the budget is available, the administrative staff also takes a team of teachers to national conferences so that they can learn about new practices that develop the literacy and numeracy of the students in order to improve their college readiness. Where needed, coaches from our Affinity group, New Visions for Public Schools, provide further support as they work with the various departments and share their curricular resources to help them use student work to adjust instructional practices and design rigorous lessons and unit plans. In addition, to ensure consistency of practice, an outside vendor is contracted to conduct study skills workshops for students, teachers and parents throughout the year. An educational consultant works with the leadership team to help norm the team’s vision of effective instruction in the classroom. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 1  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers have a large voice in the use and selection of appropriate assessments that are used to ensure that students are learning and growing. Professional development for teachers in using assessment appropriately begins with establishing a school-wide understanding of assessment and the variety of data that can be culled from them. We identify student needs based on data like Regents scores, credit accumulation, and course grades that will help us assess the progress of the students in developing the skills that they need to be successful on their exams or Common Core-aligned tasks. Teachers work together to design curriculum and assessment, using the Common Core standards as a guide, as well as resources from EngageNY.org and New Visions. Once teachers create assessments, they work with supervisors to fine-tune them. The departments and administrative team work together to disaggregate student data from these assessments to determine next steps and further supports/resources needed. This cycle of improvement is continuous as we work to target student growth areas and address them to prevent misconceptions and misunderstandings. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal 247,310 0 X 2 Column B Section Reference(s) CEPOverview, Section 5A - 5E, Academic Intervention Services, Students in Temporary Housing  Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 12,366 0 3,608,935 X X CEPOverview, Section 5A - 5E, Academic Intervention Services, Students in Temporary Housing CEPOverview, Section 5A - 5E, Academic Intervention Services, Students in Temporary Housing 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 3   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Civic Leadership Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Civic Leadership Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 5  ● offering various ways that families can access information about the academic program and resources to help them support their children; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. ● providing workshops on instructional approaches and strategies that they can support at home. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, School Quality Snapshot and Guide, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 6  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting workshops to train parents on the study skills program that will given to students in grades 9-10; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center with instructional materials and a lending library for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● developing and maintaining an active presence on social media platforms to keep families informed of meetings, special events, important dates, and opportunities for families and students . School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Civic Leadership Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement 7  between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● conducting workshops on the study skills programs that students in grades 9-10 are trained in; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 8  ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 9  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. Parent Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities   attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 0      follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: Civic Leadership Academy This school is (check one): DBN: 24Q293 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> The ESL Coordinator, Gabrielle Kaplan, under the supervision of Amanda Hunter, the assistant principal; in conjunction with the ELA/ESL Department, has reviewed ELL data including NYSESLAT scores by modality, Regents scores, credit accumulation, IEPs and student/parent surveys and determined that our English Language Learners require continued support in developing their writing skills. In addition, based on data collected by the guidance counselors, and through teacher/parent/student surveys, ELLs- both former and current, require additional emotional support. Our ELL population is grappling with struggles beyond academic and communication; they have the added struggle of learning to navigate their multi-layered identities in a new community and culture. In order to meet these two needs- academic and emotional- we will be implementing an after school program that works in conjunction with their English Seminar course. The (ENL) Crafts Club will offer ELLs the opportunity for creative expression so that they can become more confident, share their culture with others rather than feeling pressured to assimilate, and provide them with a safe space to experiment and form their identity. All current and former ELLs of all grades will be invited to attend. The Crafts Club will meet once a week for approximately 120 minutes, for the duration of the school year. Instruction will occur in English, but students will have access to translation tools and online videos. Ms. Kaplan, the ENL Coordinator along with Ms. Nguyen, the school’s principal, will provide instruction to students. They will be taught how to use various crafting tools and machines such as digital printers, cricut makers, scoring board and envelope makers, paper punchers, glue guns, precision scissors, etc. These materials will allow students to work on the creative pieces that will accompany their writing products. Materials for the writing component will include the following texts: Little Fish by Beyer, Wreck This Journal by Keri Smith, Journal Sparks, The Memoir Project, etc. In the spring, we will offer a 7 week Regents Prep program for Global History and ELA, 2 hours per week, taught by Ms. Kaplan to further support ELL students in preparing them for these exams. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration  topics to be covered 3  Part C: Professional Development  name of provider Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> The Professional Development Committee, under the supervision of Amanda Hunter, the assistant principal, will be conducting weekly staff development for all teachers as all our teachers service our ELLs in some capacity. In addition, teachers servicing students that are predominantly ELLs, FELLs, or ELL-SWDs, will receive additional professional development through OELL training sessions, New Visions sponsored workshops, etc. Professional Development will include topics such as ELL subgroups and characteristics, ELLs meeting the standards of Common Core, literacy in all content areas, literacy in the ELL classroom, literacy meets Common Core State Standards, the teacher as a facilitator, scaffolding techniques to help language learners, engaging lessons for ELLs, active learning, quality questioning, etc. The ESL Coordinator will also offer one to one professional development for all new teachers, specifically those servicing ELL-SWDs and low functioning ELLs. As the school year progresses, areas and topics in need of professional development will be identified and incorporated into the existing schedule. Rotating Schedule for the following afternoons: 9/17, 9/24, 10/1, 10/15, 10/22, 10/29, 11/5, 11/19, 12/10 , future dates TBD Titles: 1. Literacy2. Engaging Students 3. Active Learning4. New Teacher Induction 5. Writing Process in all contents Participants: All staff members serving ELLsPDs are led by various members of the UFT Professional Development Committee We will also search for outside PD that support these instructional areas. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> We are very responsive to the needs of our ELL parents because we understand that they are a vital part in the student's learning process. Based on the data from parent surveys, individual conferences, PA meetings, and parent involvement in special events, it has been determined that ELL parents would greatly benefit from workshops on the following topics: 1. College Application Process and Financial Aid (December/ January)2. Accessing Jupitergrades to track and monitor the academic progress of child (September/October)3. Immigration/ Non-citizen rights4. Graduation Requirements5. AP Classes/Courses Dates TBD Parents will be notified via e-mail, phone, mail, and letters home. Parent engagement activities will be provided in conjunction with the guidance counselors Ms. Russo, Ms. Arias, and the parent coordinator Ms. Cabrera. 4 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name Civic Leadership Academy Borough Queens School Number 293 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Phuong Nguyen Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Gabrielle Kaplan Teacher/Subject Area Joanna LoBrutto/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Dale Burcalow/ELA Related-Service Provider Nadezda Aminov/Speech and SPED Superintendent Assistant Principal Amanda Hunter Coach School Counselor Jennifer Russo Parent Iris Flores- Salazar Parent Coordinator Scarlet Cabrera Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 6  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 546 Total number of ELLs 34 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.23% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use eighth grade ELA scores to inform our assessment of literacy skills. We also conduct the Performance Series assessments at the beginning, middle, and end of the year in order to determine reading levels, areas of need, and monitor progress of our students. Additionally, all teachers conduct diagnostic exams at the start of the school year to determine the needs of their students. At the beginning of new units, ELA teachers give baseline assessments to evaluate student needs and create targeted instruction. NYSESLAT/NYSITELL results from the previous and current year are disaggregated, and the results are used to inform our instructional plans for our students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 7  The ENL teachers pull students from their push-in classes for one period to test the students at the beginning, middle, and end of the year in the Performance Series to use as indicators of student progress. They analyze the results from each assessment and share specific strategies with the content teachers who teach the students through a shared document on Google Drive and during beginning of the year ENL workshops. ELA teachers administer baseline assessments as part of their planning and Part III: Assessment Analysis Part II: ELL Demographics Page 3 instruction. NYSESLAT/NYSITELL disaggregated data are also shared with teachers of ENL students through a shared Google Drive document. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ENL program based on how ELLs perform on various assessments including Regents exams (and whether they meet College Readiness standards), the NYSESLAT exam (movement from year to year), diagnostic tests, and Performance Series assessments. We also look at credit accumulation and their overall performance in core classes. In addition, students are asked to complete surveys each semester about their needs and successes. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL teachers meet with the Special Education department and the Adminstrative Team to discuss immediate interventions such as afterschool programs and/or Saturday school programs. These meetings occur periodically during extended days or during/post IEP meeting with ELLs with IEPs. In addition, this information informs programming for the following semester and school year as well as the hiring of new staff members to address the areas of need. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Currently, 12% of our students are scoring at the Emerging level on the NYSESLAT/NYSITELL exam. The breakdown by grade is as follows: 9th grade: 1, 10th grade: 1, 11th grade: 2, 12th grade: 0. Currently, 20% of our students are scoring at the Transitioning level on the NYSESLAT/NYSITELL exam. The breakdown by grade is as follows: 9th grade: 4, 10th grade: 2, 11th grade: 1, 12th grade: 0. Currently, 68% of our students are scoring at the Expanding level on the NYSESLAT/NYSITELL exam. The breakdown by grade is as follows: 9th grade: 13, 10th grade: 5, 11th grade: 6, 12th grade: 0. All of the ELL students in 12th grade have passed the NYSESLAT exam or have been declassified because of a passing score on the ELA Regents. The majority of our current ELL students are in 9th and 10th grade and are mostly Expanding. As a result, a dually certified ENL/ELA teacher teaches two English Seminar classes. ELLs and Former ELLs are programmed for this period and receive instruction in ELA with Integrated ENL. Newcomers also receive a period of Stand Alone ENL in a small group setting with a certified ENL teacher, which allows the teacher to assist them with all their courseload while working on English language acquisition. An ENL teacher also co-teaches Global History to assist 10th grade ELLs with technical writing. Similarly, an ENL teacher pushes into both a Biology and Earth Science (Integrated ENL and Self Contained) course to provide additional assistance. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The Administrative team meets with the ENL teachers prior to the start of the school year to disseminate this data and make appropriate program changes, choosing which classes should be offered, which core classes need to be co-taught with an ENL teacher, and which contiguous grade bands should be grouped together for Stand Alone ENL and/or English Seminar classes. In addition, these findings are shared during grade and department meetings with all teachers of ELLs. These findings can also be found and accessed by all teachers on a shared google drive document. Part IV: ELL Programming 8  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. Freestanding ENL program. Students receive Integrated ENL in ELA Seminar classes, Global History classes, Biology classes, and Earth Science classes. An ENL teacher pushes into one period of ICT/ENL Biology, one period of self contained Biology, one period of ICT/ENL Earth Science, and one period of self contained Earth Science. In addition, a dually certified ELA/ENL teacher teaches two periods of English Seminar (one period of 9th/10th and one period of 11th/12th) and two periods of Global History (one ICT/ENL period and one ENL period). Due to the large number of ELLs with IEPs, a special education teacher also co- teaches one period of Global History with the content teacher and ENL teacher. Thus, ELLs in all grade levels receive ENL support along with Special Education support if they have an IEP. These classes have general education students, ELLs, students with IEPs, and ELLs with IEPs. Students who are Entering or Emerging also have a Stand Alone ENL class, taught by an ENL teacher. Currently, the Stand Alone ENL class serves two different grade spans: one period with 9th and 10th graders and a second period with only 11th graders. ELLs are mainstreamed for all other subjects. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Currently, we have two ENL teachers for our 34 ELLs and Former ELLs. Integrated ENL in Biology meets five days a week for 45 minutes for a total of 225 minutes. Integrated ENL in Earth Science meets five days a week for 45 minutes for a total of 225 minutes. Integrated ENL in Global Historty meets five days a week for 45 minutes for a total of 225 minutes. Integrated ENL in English Seminar meets five days a week for 45 minutes for a total of 225 minutes. Although we currently have no 12th grade ELLs, the Integrated ENL English Seminar class provides services to 12th grade former ELLs. Both former ELLs and current ELLs (of all ELL levels) are placed in Integrated ENL classes based on their grade level. Students who are Entering or Emerging also receive Stand Alone ENL five days a week for 45 minutes for a total of 225 minutes. We currently do not provide home language arts instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All students are mainstreamed for all classes besides Stand Alone ENL, and instruction is in English, except for the Spanish/French language courses offered. Teachers use whole group, small group, and individualized instruction with all students including ELLs. In order to address the needs of our ELL students in acquiring English language proficiency and literacy skills, EL methodologies are incorporated into the content areas, especially for Entering and Emerging ENL students. ELL students receive differentiated instruction through small group instruction in the content areas of ELA, math, social studies, and science (i.e. scaffolding, repetition, graphic organizers, interactive read-alouds, retellings, sequencing, thematic units, predicting, anticipatory guides, story maps, etc.). Students have access to a native language dictionary, glossaries, and technology supports in all classes. Other materials include text guides, summaries, translated texts, and other language supports. The ENL Coordinator identifies ELL students (level of proficiency and special needs) to all teachers and is available to conference and common plan on a daily basis in person and through the google drive. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 9  ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home language by providing alternative texts in the home language or translated support texts for core classes. In addition, students whose first language is Spanish, the dominant first language of our ELLs, are given Mock Regents exams throughout the year in their home language. They are also given the same exam in English and are allowed to use both, which helps us evaluate their content knowledge rather than language proficiency. English Language Page 5 Learners, specifically our newcomers, work directly with bilingual paraprofessionals, teachers, and/or staff members, allowing them to respond in either English, their home language, or both languages when being orally assessed and when completing writing tasks as well. All bilingual staff members are also used to help translate student-created documents in their home language when needed. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The majority of ELLs are mainstreamed and many ELLs are placed in ICT classes. There is sufficient heterogeneity, and teachers further differentiate their instruction and curricula so that the needs of students are met at all levels. Teachers use leveled reading materials and have students participate in collaborative work. The Integrated ENL classes differentiate for ELLs according to their linguistic level. Further differentiation occurs between newcomers and long-term ELLs and between different home languages. The needs of Spanish speaking ELLs and ELLs from non-Indo-European language groups create different pedagogical needs that are duly noted and addressed by the ENL teachers and all teachers of ELLs. SIFE ELLs are placed in small Stand Alone ENL classes and Integrated ENL, as per requirements outlined in CR Part 154.2. Struggling readers and developing writers are exposed to an accelerated phonics, level guided reading, creative writing and vocabulary development program. They are also placed in ICT classes and paired with academically strong and helpful peer mentors. In addition, support is provided for all classroom content teachers by the ENL teachers. Students are not tracked according to how long they have been in the United States, but rather according to their English proficiency level. Many newcomers arrive with knowledge of English and thus are placed in an ENL class based on their level. Newcomers are paired with peer mentors so that they may begin to build a relationship with the school community. Similarly, the ENL teacher and other teachers alike work on building cultural bridges, making these students feel welcome, and drawing connections between their home language and culture with the culture and life of the school community, the city, and the United States. Students who have had ELL status for four to six years are expected to have achieved Advanced status, if not Proficient. If they have not, they are placed in Integrated ENL and ICT classes, as per their IEP (many Developing students have IEPs). They function in heterogeneously mixed classes that are differentiated and work with the ENL teacher to master academic English. Most ELLs who have achieved Advanced status (Expanding level) need to focus on the mastery of academic English in conjunction with improving their literacy skills. They are proficient or approaching proficicency on the Speaking and Listening sections of the NYSESLAT, but need to raise Writing levels specifically. The Integrated ENL classes focus on academic language and moving students towards college readiness. Similarly, the English Seminar classes expose students to college level sources and require they work on both group and individual authentic writing projects. In addition, some of these students have general academic motivational and behavioral issues that are addressed through referrals made to the guidance counselors. Parents, peers, and community resources are also enlisted in supporting the ELLs in their move towards Proficiency. ELL students who have reached proficiency are offered all NYS Regents testing modifications as per the guidelines of the NYSED. Former ELLs receive more than the mandatory 90 minutes of Integrated ENL; instead, they receive 225 minutes of Integrated ENL in various core classes and/or English Seminar to provide them with a smooth transition from ELL status to Former ELL status to general education student. Former ELLs are monitored by their former ENL teachers and their Guidance Counselors. An ENL teacher conferences with the former ELLs to ensure they are on track for graduation and meet college readiness standards. All teachers and staff members are given a Former ELL list at the beginning of each school year, which is updated with new admits; if students are struggling, teachers contact the ENL teacher and Guidance Counselors to check in with students and determine how to best intervene. Former ELLs are often given Regents preparatory classes the semester before they take a Regents exam, and are placed in ICT classes whenever possible so that there are several teachers in the Page 6 classroom able to provide more one on one help. They are also given full access to ENL resources: leveled books, home language dictionaries, mainstream literature, abridged texts, texts in Spanish, texts on CD, vocabulary games, access to a latop cart fitted with new 0  Lenovo laptops, and are informed of all ELL and F-ELL opportunities (scholarships, college programs, outside support programs, etc.). 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Differentiated instruction for ELLs with special needs depend on their Individualized Education Plans. A special education teacher in each content area pushes into the core subject classes and modifies instruction based on student needs and testing accommodation. The special education and ENL teacher collaborate in their support of these students, working with subject teachers to incorporate scaffolds and language support for the students. Teachers also incorporate leveled texts where possible. Materials include leveled readers, side by side texts in English and home language, guiding questions, visuals, native language aids, large print, audiobooks, films, etc. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Special Education and ENL teachers collaborate in the support of ELL-SWD students. These students are placed in ICT classes for Regents-bearing classes or self contained classes depending on their IEP. The may also receive an Alternate Placement Language paraprofessional to assist them in all their classes. All teachers are informed of the status of their students and have access to their Performance Series Assessment as well as SESIS in order to provide proper help and simultaneously create an individualized rigorous program. Special Education teachers push in to several classes in order to assist in this process. Students are placed into ICT classes. Math/English teachers are also available for one to one tutoring during Administrative duty periods (in the Writing Center and/or Math Lab). Moreover, the ELL-SWD students are strongly encouraged to attend Child Center's Afterschool Homework Help and Tutoring program. During the spring semester, where possible, these students are programmed for Regents support classes in addition to their regular content-area classes. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We are able to identify students who need targeted intervention based on AYP data, STARS Scholarship Report, diagnostic examinations, Jupitergrades, and teacher-made assessments. Thus, we are able to tailor the type of support we provide to the specific needs of the different categories of ELL students. All ELL students are identified to their classroom teacher so that they can adopt strategies supportive of their ELL students. In addition, all current and former ELL students take Integrated ENL classes in subject areas that are generally most difficult and vocabulary intense in order to support and develop their reading and writing skills. SIFE students are offered AIS courses, counseling, individualized tutoring, and support classes in the core content areas. Newcomers are programmed based on their NYSESLAT or NYSITELL scores and receive level appropriate support in addition to counseling and tutoring as needed. ELL students who have received 4-6 years of service are also programmed based on their NYSESLAT scores and receive tutoring in core subjects. Long-term ELLs receive tutoring and counseling on an as-needed basis. ELL students identified as Emerging or Entering take Stand Alone ENL classes based on their level of language proficiency. They are also programmed for ICT classes as per their IEP and receive tutoring and counseling as needed. All ELL interventions are offered in English. However, language paraprofessionals and bilingual staff members offer tutoring and assistance in English and the student’s home language. Targeted intervention for ELA occurs by giving ELLs or former ELLs an additional English elective prior to taking the ELA Regents (summer and during the school year). Similarly, Math and Science electives are offered to assist ELLs and Former ELLs with academic vocabulary and procedures that are content specific. The Social Studies department works closely with the ELA department to streamline process writing protocols and ondemand writing experiences. In the past, students who were given support classes for Regents exams are able to pass the exams and/or score in a higher range. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on new state guidelines for ELLs, we will be using the Integrated ENL model to offer in class ELL support to students in all grade levels of ELA. We have implemented a school wide protocol for all process writing to be done on Google Docs and in Page 7 Google classroom so students can be prepared for college and career readiness while being provided feedback by both their content and ENL teachers. This provides ELLs with instant use of technology to assist with translation and scaffolds pre uploaded by teachers. English Seminar is offered to former ELLs in the upper grades so they can receive additional instruction 1  and participate in writing workshops modeled around college writing course work. A Memoir Seminar is offered to current and former ELLs, many of which have IEPs, where students participate in memoir writing workshops and will simultaneously create their own 'smash book'. Similarly, there is an after school creative writing club that culminates in a literary journal and former and current ELLs are strongly encouraged to participate in order to share their culture and experiences with the entire school (former and current ELLs are allowed to write pieces in their home language and/or English). In addition, there is an ENL Crafts Club where former and current ELLs are supported both academically and emotionally and offered opportunities to explore their creativity. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students can and do participate in all school programs without exception. They have access to the same high quality instructional materials as all other students. ELL students are a very active part of our after school programs, which is funded by the school and Child Center of NY. This program provides academic and extracurricular programming to students. There is homework help everyday as well as tutoring and one-to-one intervention. Students also participate in monthly community service projects including fund raising and visiting nursing homes. Students also engage in after school sports and arts activities such as Rugby, Table Tennis, the Music and Art Showcase, Writing Club, Crafts Club, and other music and dance performances throughout the school year. Many of the ELLs also take part in Shakespeare Faire. The ENL teachers, content area teachers, and other staff members advise and help the ELLs so that they may take part in all activities offered at CLA. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELL students benefit from texts and materials that are developed specifically for ELLs. The shared ENL classroom is equipped with two computers for use by ELLs as well as a class set of laptops and a Smartboard. Dictionaries, glossaries, and cognate charts in the home language are made available in ENL and content area classrooms. Age and grade appropriate support and resources are offered to our ELL students. Other instructional materials that are available to our ELL students are a Computer Lab, the campus Library, Smart boards, projectors for presentations, digital cameras, and video cameras. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is offered in the ENL program through the use of dictionaries, glossaries, cognate charts, home language texts, a dually certified ENL/ELA teacher, and Alternate Placement Language paraprofessionals. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All of the required services, support, and resources for high school-aged ELLs are available to our students. We use a wide variety of resources in our school including teacher-made materials, textbooks and trade books on a range of levels, and a large variety of non-text hands-on materials. In addition, our school has wireless access in all of our classrooms and students use the internet to access resources and post on-going assignments. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELL students benefit from texts and materials that are developed specifically for ELLs. The shared ENL classroom is equipped with two computers for use by ELLs as well as a class set of laptops and a Smartboard. Dictionaries, glossaries, and cognate charts in the home language are made available in ENL and content area classrooms. Age and grade appropriate support and resources are offered to our ELL students. Other instructional materials that are available to our ELL students are a Computer Lab, the campus Library, Smart boards, projectors for presentations, digital cameras, and video cameras. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, we offer a New Student Orientation and an Open House for families to visit the school. The Guidance counselors, Parent Coordinator, and ENL Coordinator do active outreach to families and conduct 2  interviews with ELLs and their families. They explain the school rules, customs, make sure students know how to get to and from school, and pair the student with an experienced student who can help them adjust to the new school and culture. We also offer a schoolwide Orientation Day on the second day of school led by all the staff and teachers. ELLs are given the opportunity to create a peer support network, strengthen academic and social skills, and become familiar with the school environment and its resources. This year, we will also be implementing a Summer Bridge program and ELLs and former ELLs will be targeted for this opportunity so they can be paired with older peer mentors, meet staff members prior to the beginning of the school year, and become a part of the school community. ELLs who enroll during the school year also participate in a parent meeting with the ENL Coordinator and ENL teachers within days of their enrollment. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, Spanish and French are language elective for all students including the ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development for all personnel who work with ELLs is provided within the school’s regular, on-going professional development program. It is delivered during conference days and faculty and department conferences. The ENL Coordinator conducts professional development with all content teachers, assistant principals, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, speech therapists, and other staff members in meetings and one to one, when necessary. The trainings include but are not limited to: ELL learning profiles, workshop model as an ELL support, scaffolding techniques for ELLs, strategies for building academic language, ENL in the content areas, literacy, assessment and evaluation of ELLs, NYSESLAT results and requirements, and application of the CCSS for ELLs; close reading with ELLs in mind, lesson/unit planning with academic language as a focus, adressing all modalities of language within unit and individual lesson plans, academic language in the math and science classroom, argumentation, paired texts, and the informational text shift. All staff members are provided with manuals on scaffolding techniques that aid ELLs in meeting the CCSS, access to ELL rescources on the school’s Google Drive, and copies of NYSESLAT results and Performance Standard reading levels and goals. The ENL Coordinator is also available daily to provide student specific support to general education teachers. Faculty also engage in Analyzing Student Work sessions in which Regents/ core content scaffolds are created based on the needs of ELLs. The guidance counselor receives professional development during the school's on-going professional development program and attends outside workshops when available. In addition, other workshops are offered throughout the year depending on funding and availability. Teachers, staff members, and other personnel attend such workshops as QTEL, New Visions sponsored trainings, and the NCTE Conference.(see above) 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff are provided profiles for all current and former ELLs. They are given a list of ELLs' home language, the adult preferred language, scores from their 8th grade standardized exams, NYSESLAT scores by modality, access to IEPs, and weekly updates 3  from the ENL Coordinator about student concerns, needs, and progress. Using this information, teachers and other staff members are able to ensure the transition from middle school to high school is a smooth adjustment due to support from staff coupled with a supportive learning environment. ELL training for all staff are met in a variety of ways. For the majority of staff, we conduct at least one monthly PD session on ELL strategies for 48 minutes, which is a total of 480 minutes or 15% of the total PD hours for the year. Some staff members receive additional hours by attending outside workshops as stated above. Special Education teachers also receive one to one training with the ENL coordinator. The ENL teachers attends workshops offered by New Visions and the Learning Partner Program twice monthly, training on the SIOP model, professional development offered through the Center for Applied Lingusitics, and workshops on ELL topics through the UFT. Records are maintained in the main office, by the ENL Coordinator, and within our school Google Drive. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? For ELL students with IEPs, individual meetings with parents of ELLs occur during their Annual IEP meetings. In an effort to accommodate parents who often have to take off from work, we schedule this time to also go over their child's progress, goals, NYSESLAT/NYSITELL results, state exam scores, and anecdotals by both the content teachers and the ENL teacher in relation to their status as an ELL. The Guidance Counselor or Parent Coordinator provides Spanish translation services when applicable. By phone translation services are used with other languages. We identify the parents' preferred language in order to provide translation services as necessary. For non-IEP ELLs, these meetings occur during second semester, prior to the NYSESLAT exam. Prior to such meetings, there is communication from the content teachers and ENL teacher through Jupiter Grades, an online gradebook/message center, and by phone during weekly dedicated time for Parent Outreach, about their child's progress and needs. Parents are also updated by mail and receive most of this information in letters that are translated to their home language. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Parent Coordinator and Parent Association schedule workshops on a monthly basis for all parents. Parents are also informed about school services and activities via letters, email, phone calls, Jupiter Grades (online grading program available in English and Spanish) and face-to-face communications. Additionally, the Parent Coordinator is available every day to answer any questions or concerns that parents may have. She is bilingual and speaks the dominant first language of our ELLs. Translation services are available at Parent Association meetings throughout the school year. To the greatest extent possible, all parent communication is translated into the dominant language as well. For newly entering ELLs, all materials are available in the parent’s home language so they may better understand the placement of their children and their NYSITELL results. During the orientation meeting, translators are also available so that parents may be informed. Furthermore, we offer many opportunities for parents to ask questions about the ENL program and their child’s ELL status. Parent conferences are also conducted every fall and spring to orient ELL parents regarding program requirements, standards, assessments, and school expectations. Translation services are available during Parent Conferences so that ELL parents can meet with the teachers. Translation services are also available on an ongoing basis for parents who need to meet with the Guidance Counselors and/or teachers. If necessary, ELL parents are referred to community agencies that can provide additional services. All parents are invited to attend the Music and Art Showcase and other after school arts and music events. We inform ELL parents of all relevant DOE and community sponsored events via mail and our automated phone system, which has been programmed to deliver messages in English and Spanish. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 4  5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Phuong Nguyen, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Civic Leadership Academy School DBN: 24Q293 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Phuong Nguyen Title Principal Amanda Hunter Assistant Principal Scarlet Cabrera Parent Coordinator Gabrielle Kaplan ENL/Bilingual Teacher Iris Flores Salazar Parent Joanna LoBrutto/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Nadezda Aminov/Speech and SPED Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a Coach Coach Jennifer Russo School Counselor n/a n/a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Dale Burcalow/ELA Other n/a n/an/a Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/26/2018 6/26/2018 6/26/2018 6/26/2018 6/26/2018 6/26/2018 6/26/2018 n/a n/a 6/26/2018 n/a n/a 6/26/2018 n/a n/a 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q293 School Name: Civic Leadership Academy Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Gabrielle Kaplan ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to determine the language needs of our population and ensure that all parents are provided information in a language they can understand, we examined data from ATS, Home Language Surveys, Emergency Contact cards, and our meetings with parents. The majority of our population speaks Spanish, followed by English, and other languages. Based on the ATS reports, Adult Preferred Language (RAPL) and the School Data Summary Report for Home Language (RSDS and RCPL), 56% of our parents need Spanish translation in both written and oral form, 2% require translations in Bengali, and 1% or less require translations in Arabic, Filipino, Punjabi, Nepali, Chinese, Hindi, and others. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 8  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ALBANIAN ARMENIAN BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) CHAM CHINESE ANY FRENCH GREEK JAPANESE KOREAN MANDARIN NEPALI ENGLISH PUNJABI POLISH SENUFO SPANISH TIBETAN 2 1 10 1 17 1 2 1 2 0 2 274 2 0 2 437 1 0.26 0.13 1.31 0.13 2.22 0.13 0.26 0.13 0.26 0 0.26 35.77 0.26 0 0.26 57.05 0.13 2 1 10 1 11 1 2 1 2 6 2 276 2 1 2 434 1 0.26 0.13 1.31 0.13 1.44 0.13 0.26 0.13 0.26 0.78 0.26 36.03 0.26 0.13 0.26 56.66 0.13 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English and Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Academic Calendar September After School Program Information September Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Native speakers on staff will provide translations. Native speakers on staff will provide translations. This will be completed by Summer 2018 to ensure timely provision of the document to the families. 9  NYS Regents Schedule September, January Course Syllabi September, January Welcome Letter September Parent Workshop Schedule September SLT Meeting Dates September Military Opt Out Letter September Condom Distribution September Health Curriculum September, January Trip Consent Forms On Going Native speakers on staff will provide translations. This will be completed by Summer 2018 to ensure timely provision of the document to the families. Native speakers on staff will provide translations. This will be completed by Summer 2018 to ensure timely provision of the document to the families. Native speaks on staff will provide translations. This will be completed by Summer 2017 to ensure timely provision of the document to the families. Native speakers on staff will provide translations. This will be completed by Summer 2018 to ensure timely provision of the document to the families. Native speakers on staff will provide translations. This will be completed by Summer 2018 to ensure timely provision of the document to the families. Native speakers on staff will provide translations. This will be completed by Summer 2018 to ensure timely provision of the document to the families. Native speakers on staff will provide translations. This will be completed by Summer 2018 to ensure timely provision of the document to the families. Native speakers on staff will provide translations. This will be completed by Summer 2018 to ensure timely provision of the document to the families. Native speakers on staff will provide translations. Teachers or organizers of school sponsored field trips are asked to submit copies of consent form in English two weeks prior to the trip 0  date to ensure that we will have sufficient time to translate the form. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Meet the Teacher Night Sept.26, 2018 Parent Teacher Conferences Nov 27-28, 2018 March 7-8 2019 May 16, 2019 Monthly Parents Association Meetings-3rd Tuesday of each month Monthly, 3rd Tuesday of each month Parental Meetings: Academic and Behavioral Intervention On going; as needed SLT Meetings Monthly, 3rd Tuesday of each month interpretation service(s)? Native speakers of Spanish and Chinese will be on staff to facilitate in translation and interpretation if needed. For all other languages, we will use the Translation and Interpretation services via telephone. Native speakers of Spanish and Chinese will be on staff to facilitate in translation and interpretation if needed. For all other languages, we will use the Translation and Interpretation services via telephone. Native speakers of Spanish and Chinese will be on staff to facilitate in translation and interpretation if needed. For all other languages, we will use the Translation and Interpretation services via telephone. Native speakers of Spanish and Chinese will be on staff to facilitate in translation and interpretation if needed. For all other languages, we will use the Translation and Interpretation services via telephone. Native speakers of Spanish and Chinese will be on staff to facilitate in translation and interpretation if needed. For all other languages, we will use the Translation and Interpretation services via telephone. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have a number of native speakers of Spanish, Bengali,, French and Chinese on staff who can easily communicate with our limited English proficient families of those two languages. For families of other native languages, we will be using the city's "Over the Phone Interpretation Services" to communicate with them. 1  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During staff meetings, we will be providing staff with information on how to contact the translation and interpretation services of the NYCDOE. This information will made available for staff to reference via Google Docs. Copies of "I Speak...." will be provided to all staff. In addition, copies of the T & I brochure will be available in the main office, deans office, guidance office, and parent coordinator's office. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We fulfill Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 in the following manner: • We provide each parent whose primary language is a covered language, and who requires language assistance services, with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. We have copies of the translated versions of this document, in the covered languages, in the main office to be distributed as needed. • We post signs in the covered language, indicating the availability of interpretation services. These signs are located in the main office and at the entrance to the Guidance Suit offices. • In our school’s safety plan, we include procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. • We currently do not have 10% of our students whose families' primary language is not English nor a covered language and thus, do not have forms or signage translated at this time. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We communicate regularly with our parents, either through direct outreach and/or parent meetings like the Parent Association meetings. We use their questions and concerns as a source of feedback for the services we provide and encourage them to share their concerns and questions through different venues, like meetings with the Parent Coordinator or other staff members. We also administer the NYCDOE parent surveys each year and use this data to inform decisions regarding parent programs and student supports. In addition, we schedule focus groups of parents, inclusive of all cultures and languages that are represented in the school, to gather feedback and best practices on how best to meet their needs and the support that they want. 2 
