 30Q300 School Name: THE 30TH AVENUE SCHOOL (G&T CITYWIDE) Principal: VASILIOS BINIARIS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Q300 – The 30 th Avenue School 343000010300 K-4, 5-8 (2018/2019) School Number (DBN): 30Q300 Elementary School – 28-37 29 th Street, 4 th Floor, Astoria, NY 11102 Middle School – 31-51 21 st Street, 5 th Floor, LIC, NY 11106 School Address: ES - 718.626.8502 ES – 718.626.8508 MS - 718.726.0501 MS - 718.726.0949 Phone Number: Vasilios Biniaris, Principal Fax: vbiniar@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: VasiliosBiniaris Alison Lisberger Julissa McHugh and Paula Marisi Monica Mohan N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 30 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dr. Philip Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, 5 th Floor, LIC, NY 11101 pcompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718.391.8323 Phone Number: 718.391.6147 Fax:   Field Support Center (FSC) Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, 4 th Floor, LIC, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7183918222 Phone Number: 7183918222 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) VasiliosBiniaris AlisonLisberger Paula Marisi N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A SonitaRamkishun Maria Kakakios Elijah Cho *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Staff   Name Monica Mohan LaShawnna Harris Rajendra Jailall-Jimenez Laura Marks N/A KasiaJankowski JulissaMcHugh N/A N/A Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Staff Member/PTACo-President Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? As one of NYC's handful of citywide gifted and talented schools, our mission statement is: Section 4: CEP Overview Through the inclusion of diverse student identities, inquiry-based learning, and data-driven decision-making, Q300 will graduate students who collaborate with others to ask meaningful questions, to solve complex problems, and to engage responsibly with their communities and beyond. By exploring who they are and who they want to be, students   engage in the active process of making knowledge and better understanding the world around them in ways that drive a sense of responsibility and action. Q300 Educational Philosophy At Q300, our core values frame our educational philosophy and guide the daily experience of students, teachers, and families. Inclusion We embrace the diversity of our community and work to ensure all students have the tools and support they need to learn and grow in a healthy and productive school environment. Inclusion begins with regular morning meetings or advisory periods in which students and teachers develop meaningful and supportive personal relationships by identifying all we have in common and fostering respect for our differences. Through inclusion, we hope to create students who honor others as well as themselves. At Q300, inclusion means more than including all students, but the entire school community. We value our teachers and families; and encourage all stakeholders to share their voices and take an active role in shaping and supporting Q300’s unique community. Inquiry We believe inquiry is the key to meaningful and enduring learning for our students. Through inquiry-based lessons, teachers provide students with opportunities to construct their knowledge and deepen their conceptual understanding across the curriculum. Inquiry allows students to fully participate in the process of asking questions, uncovering knowledge, and sharing what they have learned with others. Through sharing their learning, students participate in meaningful conversations that strengthen and develop their ability to communicate and collaborate with others. While students are actively involved in the process of inquiry in the classroom, inquiry is an ongoing process for our leaders, teachers, and families. We actively seek to learn more about our students and ourselves in order to ensure daily alignment with our core values and the fulfillment of our mission. Responsibility We believe that it is a great responsibility to provide our students and families with an enriching educational experience that leads to the development of active and engaged citizens. At Q300, we provide students with the support they need to play an active role in the learning process to facilitate their own success and the success of others. Our ultimate goal is to guide our students as they use their unique gifts and talents to improve their community. An essential step in supporting our students in becoming active citizens is engaging them in annual service learning projects. Through this process, students learn how individuals can work with others take action to improve their communities. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 0  During our summer professional development and planning/collaboration time, using appropriate data, our staff will work to refine and update curriculum maps to better reflect the needs of our students and to promote challenging yet rewarding learning experiences. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year we will cultivate relationships with organizations that specialize in gifted education such as the National Association for Gifted Children, SENG (Social and Emotional Needs of Gifted Children) and the Johns Hopkins Center for Talented Youth. Our social and emotional program will continue to grow and improve as we work with Sanford Harmony and Responsive Classroom. Teachers will participate in professional development for Responsive Classroom by attending one of their external trainings and/or by attending an in-house session presented by one of our teachers that has been trained and has demonstrated excellence in social and emotional learning. As a culminating experience, by the end of each academic year, all of our students will engage in at least one service learning project that will show evidence of their growth in their social and emotional profile and teach them the importance of active citizenship. Our math and science program will continue to grow and improve as we leverage the ongoing growth of our teacher leaders. This upcoming year two of our teachers have been accepted as MfA (Math for America) educators. MfA recognizes the work of master teachers in math and science and we will incorporate the work of our participating staff into our professional development calendar in order to increase and improve instructional capacity and rigor in all grades for these two subjects. Additionally, we intend to financially support our teachers' participation in professional organizations such as the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics and the National Science Teachers Association. Through this measures, and by participating in relevant conferences and trainings, we will increase the circle of professional networks that our teachers travel with the express purpose of continually improving our instructional program so that our gifted students are appropriately challenged. We partner with Art House of Astoria, a locally based arts organization, to elevate our music and visual arts instruction. They work hand-in-hand with our teachers and instruct our students in music theory and production. Weekly, K-8 students experience a tiered music program whose end goal is to create a functioning band at both our elementary and middle schools. As part of our overall electives schedule, middle school students will have the option of electing to participate in our band. To infuse the visual arts into our overall curriculum, K-1 students will engage in Movement/theater and Art for grades 2-4. Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater will work with our third and fourth grade students through a 10-week cycle of cultural dance. Lastly, one of next year's instructional goals includes the cultivation of critical thinking and strategy skills and the improvement of the necessary corresponding communication skills (i.e. speaking, writing, performing) to effectively articulate student thinking. Towards that end we are increasing our partnership with NY Chess Kids. In our elementary school, students K-4 will benefit from a chess program embedded during the school day and that will be organized in 10 week cycles. A similar program will be organized at our middle school where a NY Chess Kids educator will help organize a chess club during our electives or club period. In addition, NY Chess Kids will employ several of our own teachers during an after school program with the express purpose of creating a Math Team, Debate Team, Chess Team, and LEGO Robotics Team. The critical thinking and strategy skills cultivated through these efforts will supplement school-wide efforts taking place during the day such as the inclusion of appropriate materials such as the Art of Problem Solving (AoPs) and Beast Academy. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In K-4, we will have 7 ENL students at the Expanding level and 8 ENL students at the Commanding level. Our English as a New Language (ENL) teacher instructs these students to best acquire English language proficiency. He collaborates weekly with classroom teachers to share best practices for ENL students. In the middle school, we will have one ICT classrooms per grade in grades six, seven, and eight with a total of 16 students designated as special education. Our elementary school has a total of 9 students designated as special 1  education. The middle school staff co-teaches and co-plans in order to ensure that all students with IEPs meet their goals, are socially integrated, and meet or exceed academic expectations. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Baseline data Collaborative Teachers Our most recent Quality Review stated, "While some teachers are collecting data and student work, this does not typically result in improved teacher practice or progress towards goals for groups of students." Since then, we have made some progress in implementing the use of the Peer Inter-visitation protocol as a means of improving our practices in this area. More specifically, about 40% of our teachers have been involved with visiting peers and/or discussing instructional practices, based on observations, with their team members. Next Steps 2018-2019: 1. 100% of faculty will undergo professional learning related to the use of the peer inter-visitation protocol. 2. 100% of faculty will participate in at least one cycle of peer inter-visitations that documents low-inference data and corresponding improvements suggested by team members. Our efforts will specifically focus on improving the planning of tasks that more effectively align with stated learning objectives. Peer inter-visitation schedules will be organized as follows: ** four inter-visitation cycles will be created. ** all staff will be invited to at least two half-day professional development sessions that will be facilitated by the principal. Part of the work for each of these sessions will involve visiting classrooms, analyzing our progress related to task alignment with learning objectives, and drafting positive feedback for the host teachers. Teachers will be led through the process of drafting better aligned objectives and/or tasks. 3. 20% of staff will engage in the visitation of classrooms at other schools that have demonstrated strengths in specific areas of growth for our teachers Rigorous Instruction According to the same Quality Review report, "All students work on the same task and material without entry points leading to unevenness in the levels of engagement, thinking, and participation in appropriately challenging tasks. This hinders student demonstration of higher-order thinking skills in student work products." In addition, using low-inference data obtained from classroom observations, the use of a valid learning objective and its alignment with relevant standards and tasks has been employed inconsistently. As a result of informal and formal supervisory feedback, the use of an appropriate learning objective and its corresponding alignment was being confirmed on a much more consistent basis from the spring to June of 2018. 2  Next Steps 2018-2019: 1. 100% of faculty will undergo professional learning related to effectively drafting learning objectives that are properly aligned to tasks and standards. This professional learning will take place during the two (formal) half-day peer inter-visitation professional learning sessions. 2. Active student engagement will be ensured through the incorporation of appropriate tasks that are differentiated in terms of product and process and the use of multiple entry points will lead to more even levels of engagement. The first cycle of observations will specifically focus on differentiation in order to provide actionable feedback to teachers. Data collected during this cycle will be used as a rationale for future professional learning. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q300 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 457 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 19 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 27.0% % Attendance Rate 21.0% % Reduced Lunch 2.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 1.3% 9.0% 31.3% % Multi-Racial % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.25 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 98.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 6 6 96.3% 5.5% 5.7% 5.9% 43.8% 10.1% 2 23% 3.7 98.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs: Differentiation and Formative Assessments Based on the most recent Quality Review and School Quality Guide there is a continued need to challenge students. More specifically: 2016 Quality Review     Findings: “Running record data from the elementary school is used in the early grades as common assessments with end of units used as common assessments in the middle grades. Across classrooms teacher assessment practices inconsistently reflect the use of ongoing checks for understanding.” Impact: “The inconsistent use of checks for understanding lead to lack of students’ engagement as they wait for direction or support and hinders the availability of student data needed to make adjustments. The practice of using common assessment is developing as grades are added to this growing school. Assessment data is not always used to adjust curricula and instruction.” Findings: “Teaching strategies, such as small grouping and native language supports, inconsistently provide multiple entry points into the curriculum. Across classrooms, student work products and discussion include uneven levels of thinking.” Impact: “All students work on the same task and material without entry points leading to unevenness in the levels of engagement, thinking, and participation in appropriately challenging tasks. This hinders student demonstration of higher-order thinking skills in student work products.” 2018 School Quality Guide  58% of students say that they are challenged in classes. Part 2 – Annual Goal 5  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May 2019, 50% of teachers will have evidenced consistent use of a variety of formative assessments and differentiated tasks in the classroom. Consequently, 75% or more of all teachers will attain an overall effective or highly effective rating for component (3d) Using Assessment in Instruction. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A professional learning cycle will be initiated, no later than October 2018, that will focus on differentiating tasks that are aligned with a lesson’s stated purpose. Teachers October 2018 to December 1, 2018 School leaders, designees, or an outside organization will conduct session(s) Peers will conduct inter-visitations with a focus on differentiation. These learning rounds will end with the team highlighted strengths or “grows” and item to “think about” that is connected to the focus. Teacher teams and identified host teachers October 2018 to December 2018 All teaching staff School leaders and all teachers A professional learning cycle will be initiated, no later than December 15, 2018 that will focus on the use of formative assessments. Teachers December 15, 2018 to February 18, 2019 School leaders, designees, or an outside organization will conduct session(s) Peers will conduct inter-visitations with a focus on formative assessment. These learning rounds will end with the team highlighted strengths or “grows” and item to “think about” that is connected to the focus. Teacher teams and identified host teachers December 2018 to February 2019 All teaching staff School leaders and all teaching staff School leaders will provide teacher teams with progress reports on their use of differentiated tasks and formative assessments during their monthly planning meetings. Teacher team designees will present group’s findings at the end of each learning cycle. The last observation cycle will place a focus on the planning and preparation for the use of differentiated tasks and formative assessments. Effective or highly effective ratings will only be earned when there is evidence of appropriate planning to meet the expectation. School leaders and all teachers School leaders and all teachers October 2018 to June 2019 December 2018 and March 2019 School leaders and all teaching staff School leaders and all teaching staff All teachers March 2019 to June 2019 School leaders and all teaching staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 7  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning no later than October 2018, the PTA and Parent coordinator will hold monthly meetings with small groups of parents, and an additional meeting for parents of students with IEPs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  As part of the teacher team work, teacher leaders that have evidenced exceptional progress in this area of practice will be used as models and presenters to help develop additional capacity.  Weekly Monday professional development time will be used for learning opportunities facilitated by external consultants, for team meetings, data analysis, and for presentations by our own teachers.  At least two professional learning opportunities will specifically focus on differentiating for the needs of gifted students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 30% of teachers will be consistently demonstrating the use of differentiated tasks and multiple entry points as evidenced by informal and formal observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Informal and formal observations and data collected by teacher teams. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on recent surveys conducted by our SLT: 1. The administration needs to communicate a cohesive academic and social emotional program for the school (49% of parents disagree or strongly disagree that this occurred in the 2017-18 academic year) 2. The administration needs to support and promote parental involvement 3. The administration needs to predict and prevent rather than react and repair, better planning for prevent crises down the road 60% of parents and 68% of teachers disagree or strongly disagree that this occurred in the 2017-18 academic year) 4. Students need to understand how their words make others feel, promote inclusion and respect (k-2 48%, 3-4 49%, 6-8 29% agree or strongly agree that they have been called names or teased) 5. Teachers and principal need to work together to develop instructional strategies, curriculum, instruction schedule, decision making in regards to materials, promote collaboration (39%, 25%, 50% of teachers for each item disagree or strongly disagree that this occurred in the 2017-18 academic year) 6. There is a clear split among teachers about perceptions of empowered decision-making, distribution of resources, collaboration,who gets to share ideas, etc...This is a huge departure from previous teacher surveys which overwhelming indicated positive Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May 2019, 75% of all staff will have received a minimum of three or more days training in Responsive Classroom practices and our Sanford Harmony curriculum that will lead to a 15% improvement in positive student response rates, on the School Quality Guide, when asked, whether "students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students at their school." 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All Staff July 2018-Sept 2018 Ensure that 50% or more of staff have engaged in 4 day training of Responsive Classroom training during the summer of 2018. Teachers/students September Teachers having received a 4 day training in previous years Principal, assistant principal, guidance counselor, and teachers 2018 to October 2018 Per session postings will be created for a total of 5 hours of planning time, to review Responsive Classroom practices and Sanford Harmony unit/lesson plans in order to build a cohesive SEL program in K-8. Continue teacher-led PD cycles on specific SEL programs (RC, SH, and others) in school. Staff January 2018-June 2019 Principal’s designee(s) External organizations will conduct additional professional development sessions related to maintaining a supportive environment. All staff and students December 2018 and March 2019 Presentation of K-8 SEL Curriculum at September PTA meeting, the September Parent Engagement Night, or other school led event. Parents -Incorporate teaching positive and encouraging language to our students into the SEL curriculum and morning meetings. Students September 2018 Sept 2018- June 2019 School and teacher leaders, outside organizations and guidance counselor/social worker Principal, Guidance Counselor and Social Worker Guidance Counselor, Social Worker and Teachers 0 -Assign teachers with demonstrated effectiveness in these SEL approaches to teacher leader roles to promote a cohesive academic and social emotional program for the school. Staff Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Designated teacher -Create better processes for collaboration, inclusion and mentoring among teachers and administration using protocols and consensus-based decision making. Staff Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal -Integrate and reinstitute Community Helpers programs and peer mediation, as well “Buddy Programs” between our two campuses. Students Sept 2018-2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor and Social Worker, Teacher designees 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Periodic parent workshops will focus on the unique social and emotional needs of gifted students. (Fall 2018-Spring 2019)  PTA and SLT presentations will provide an overview and specifics of the SEL program for all grades K-8  Results of comprehensive SEL and culture assessment will be presented to all staff at the June faculty conference and to parents during the June 2019 PTA meeting. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SEL Curriculum mapping during the summer and throughout the school year (training rate). Sanford Harmony and Responsive Classroom professional development and materials.    Ongoing professional development of guidance counselor and time allocated on calendar for her to conduct assemblies and small group work with students as well as professional development of teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 1  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 50% or more of teachers, K-8, will be actively involved with the facilitation of Responsive classroom, Sanford Harmony, and/or Advisory best practices. There will be an increase in social emotional awareness among all stakeholders through collaborations, communication, and social interactions. 50% or more students, K-8, will demonstrate a clear understanding of integrity, inclusion, responsibility, resilience, and sense of community within their classroom environment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Informal and formal classroom observations   Peer to Peer Inter-visitations  End of year SEL and school culture assessment(s) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  The 2016/2017 Quality Review reports a DEVELOPING rating in Alignment of Assessment and Curricula, “Structured Professional Collaboration”, and Adjustment of Instructional Practices  The School Quality Guide for 20162106/2017 reports a rating of 2.62 (a drop of 1.44 points) in Collaborative Teachers.  Q300’s Teacher School Culture Survey created by the SLT in 2018 reveals that 46% of teachers either disagree or strongly disagree with the statement, “The planning and organizational time allotted to teachers and staff is used to plan as a collective team rather than as separate individuals.  Q300’s Teacher School Culture Survey created by the SLT in 2018 reveals 30% of teachers either disagree or strongly disagree with the statement, “The administration at the school provides teachers the opportunity to work together collaboratively Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Beginning in September 2018, 75% of teachers will be receive three (3) hours, per month, of collaborative planning time during or after regular school hours, which will result in the ongoing submission of revised unit and lesson plans based on relevant data. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  School leaders will ensure that the professional learning plan can ensure that teachers have the appropriate professional development, resources, and space to work collaboratively. Teachers K-8 Sept. 2018-June 2019  School leaders  All teachers K-8  Teacher leaders  Collaborative planning dates for grade/subject teachers Teachers K-8 September  will be established on the school’s professional development calendar 15, 2018 School leaders  All teachers K-8  Professional Development Committee Protocols for collaborative planning sessions will be identified, outlined, and practiced by the staff. Teachers September 15, 2018 School leaders Teachers All teachers K-8 Professional Development Committee Develop an online tracker on Q300’s Google Account via Google Sheets to input dates, times, and topics of collaborative planning time. Teachers October 2018 School leaders or designees 4  Develop a collaborative teachers survey via Google Forms to assess teacher opinions about needed changes and supports. Teachers School leaders or designees November 2018, February 2019, and May 2019 Funds for teacher coverage with regard to collaborative planning will be allotted in the school budget. Teachers July 2018 Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Beginning of year presentation will be delivered at a PTA and SLT meeting explaining the aforementioned goal and the data justifying its inclusion. (September to November 2018)  Teacher leaders will conduct workshops focused on this area during the fall parent engagement event(s). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Curriculum pacing, maps, and co-planning time needed from content area teachers and grades. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, 50% of all teachers, K-8, will have exhibited their ongoing collaboration and common planning with peers during their mid-year review with one of our school leaders. Evidence will include lesson plans, unit plans, curriculum maps, anectodals from teacher team meetings, or other documents as a result of this dedicated work time. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Formal and informal supervisory observations of collaboration/common planning time.   Mid-year review process when teachers will show evidence of their ongoing work in relation to their use of this time. 5   Informal and formal classroom observations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the most recent 2018 School Quality Guide:  40% of teachers say that the principal makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals  38% of teachers say that the principal sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development.  33% of teachers say that the principal carefully tracks student academic progress.  13% of teachers say that the principal participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Starting no later than October 2018, the principal and assistant principal will meet monthly with teams of teachers to provide them with feedback about their planning for future units/lessons. Consequently, at least 50% of teachers will report on the 2019 School Quality Guide, that of teachers say that "the principal or assistant principal participate in instructional planning with teams of teachers." 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will receive a notification identifying their IPC dates and the expectations for the meeting. All teachers K-8 Sept. 15, 2018  Individual teachers will bring their first unit plan and corresponding lesson plans to their Initial Planning Conference (IPC). Teachers and relevant school leader will discuss the plans effectiveness to differentiate tasks and to conduct formative assessment. All teachers K-8 By October 1, 2018   School leaders School leaders School leaders will clearly explain the lesson planning expectations during each IPC to the teachers and provide the option for the use of an appropriate lesson planning template. All teachers K-8 October 1, 2018  School leaders Postings will be created to support teachers with co-planning time during after-school hours. School leaders will participate in at least one of these meetings per month. All teachers K-8 October 2018 to June 2019  School leaders  Teacher leaders Individual teachers will receive at least one monthly lesson feedback email supporting teachers’ ongoing work in planning for instruction. All teachers October 21, 2018 t0 May 15, 2018 School leaders School leaders and teachers will discuss growth during the end of year summative conferences. All teachers June 2018 School leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Beginning of year presentation will be delivered at a PTA and SLT meeting explaining the aforementioned goal and the data justifying its inclusion. 8   Teacher leaders will conduct at least one parent workshop outlining and describing school efforts to distribute  leadership. School leaders will share end of year teacher survey results about the effectiveness and success of the plan described above. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Summer planning time and the corresponding financial commitment (training rate).   External consultants (Fees)  Monday professional development time and common planning periods  Participation in nationally recognized professional organizations (i.e. National Association for Gifted Children, National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, Math for America (MfA), and Association of Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASCD). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Starting no later than October 2018, the principal and assistant principal will meet monthly with teams of teachers to provide them with feedback about their planning for future units/lessons. Consequently, at least 50% of teachers will report on the 2019 School Quality Guide, that of teachers say that "the principal or assistant principal participate in instructional planning with teams of teachers." Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Supervisory observations of professional learning sessions and teacher team meetings.   Professional learning committee check-ins  End of year teacher surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In Spring 2018, members of the SLT’s Supportive Environment team conducted a school culture survey of parents to measure the efficacy of Q300’s social emotional programing and to assess needs for the 2018-2019 academic year. The results included the following data points related to parents’ view of the school’s responsiveness and communication efforts and suggest several areas for focus and growth for next year: ● 40% of parents agreed or strongly agreed that Q300’s administration is responsive to parental and children’s concerns ● 41% of parents agreed or strongly agreed that they feel in touch with daily happenings in their child’s school through Skedula/Pupil Path ● 51% of parents agreed or strongly agreed that Q300’s administration supports and appreciates parental involvement in the school ● 73% of parents agreed or strongly agreed that Q300 lets families know how students are expected to behave Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Beginning no later than October 2018, the school will (1) hold monthly meetings with small groups of parents, and an additional meeting for parents of students with IEPs; and (2) send a concise weekly update by email and backpack. Consequently, 75% of parents, as reported by the School Quality Guide, will indicate that “of families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal or designees will conduct monthly meetings with small groups of parents, including an additional monthly meeting for parents of students with IEPs. Parents September Principal, parent 2018-June 2019 coordinator, and/or other designee School will provide in-person workshop(s) and tutorial(s) to teachers and parents on Skedula/Pupil-Path or other selected platform. School to plan and schedule, by Parents September 2018, at least two parent workshops to take place by December 2018. At least one open to all District 30 parents. Parents and teachers August 2018- October 2018 July 2018-December 2018 School leaders, parent coordinator or other designee, and/or IOS consultants Principal, Assistant Principal, guidance counselor, social worker, parent coordinator Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Parent Coordinator or other designree, and/or outside organizations Plan and schedule three parent workshops, by January 2019, to take place by June 2019. At least two of these workshops will be open to District 30 parents and at least one will address the needs gifted students and twice-exceptional children (accelerated/gifted learners with special needs). Parents and Students January 2019 to June 2019 1  Administration to notify parent Parents Sept 2018 - Principal, Assistant community within five days of any June 2019 Principal change in staff, school scheduling, school enrichment program or curricula 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  Weekly and monthly school and PTA communications will continue to reinforce the existing mission and vision of the school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PTA leaders and members School leadership Team SLT Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 75% of families will have been paired with at least one existing Q300 family to develop a stronger relationship with the school and as an ongoing resource. 75% of families will have received clear communication of PTA workshops based on interest survey results from September 2018. 75% of families will have access to a tentative year long calendar indicating workshop dates. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Staff/PTA-made family inclusion survey School culture survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Reading level (F&P or Lexile) below grade level Unit/Benchmark assessment: not meeting expectations Unit/Benchmark assessment: not meeting expectations Unit/Benchmark assessment: not meeting expectations Meet with teachers, family, and service providers to determine need Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group During the school day Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) K-3: Targeted guided reading (LLI) or Fundations phonics instruction; 6-8: small group instruction All: tier 1 and 2 curricular materials Small group All: tier 1 and 2 curricular materials Small group All: tier 1 and 2 curricular materials Small group During the school day During the school day During the school day Counseling, OT, Speech Individual or small group During the school day 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5 Our social worker and guidance counselor will reach out to families in temporary house determine what individual needs they have. We will do our best to provide the supports. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 7  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 8  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 300Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 300Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 0  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 1  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 300Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA),; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 3  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 4  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 5  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Queens District 30 School Name The 30 th Avenue School - Q300 School Number 300 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Vasilios Biniaris Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Edwin Mora Teacher/Subject Area Maria Kakakios Teacher/Subject Area Dora Fiotodimitrakis Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent 1 Assistant Principal Anna Milonakis Coach type here School Counselor Christine Katartzis Parent type here Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) 0 C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 0 457 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 17 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 3.72% 7 Total number of ELLs X ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.00%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Lang. K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Q300 uses different assessment tools to assess ELLs’ early literacy skills. The NYSITTELL will be used for the Q300 uses horizontal and vertical teacher teams to discuss and analyze student data to better serve their needs. Horizontal teacher teams meet to analyze kindergartneF&P reading rs as the baseline assessment for listening and speaking. For the 1st , 2nd and 3rd grade ELLs their NYSESLAT scores will be levels to discuss trends within a grade to plan lessons and unit for guided reading. They also meet to analyze pre and post-assessments for writing modify writing units address the used as a needs of all our baseline. For students, reading, including the ELLs Fountas and in each Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 6 8  Pinnell running record assessments are used to identify student independent and instructional reading classroom. Vertical teacher teams meet to analyze F&P reading levels. Based on the analysis, students that are not on track to meet their AYP goals are put into specific reading levels and to groups offer monitor progress. This was used to create reading groups based on their more support to those students including ELLs. This includes additional time for ELLs with Wilson’s Fundations to instructional address their lack of phonemic awareness reading levels within each class. During reading instruction teachers conference with students to determine needs for their reading groups and for each individual student. Finally the TC Writing assessment assesses their writing skills in informational, narrative and opinionated writing. Students take a pre and post test for each unit to determine student growth and needs. Also, Wilson's Fundations assessment was used to assess a student's alphabet awareness and phonemic awareness throughtout the year. These assessment tools are 9  0 0 0 0 0 Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 used to provide insights to help inform the school’s instructional plan. In addition, teachers use various forms of informal assessments such as conferencing notes, clasrroom assessments, and anecdotal records to track student achievement. The data collected also helps us make instructional decisions as well as to to adjust teaching points for upcoming units in reading and writing in all grades. It is also used for grouping all students, including the ELLs, according to their needs with emphasis on the four language modalities. 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Fountas and Pinnell assessments are given to each student five times a year to provide each teacher with the data they need to create groups and address the needs for each student. Teachers also administer pre and post assessments for each writing unit to address the needs of their students by modifying teaching lessons for the upcoming units. In Kindergarten teachers assess each student’s phonemic awareness and their sight word knowledge to know which student need assitance and time in these two areas of need 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 0  Once summative data has been gathered teacher then analyze the data to address each student’s needs. Based on the data teacher will create small groups of students who have the same need to work with during their lessons. In Kindergarten students who sturggle with phonemic awareness are grouped together to get more time practicing their letter sounds through Wilson’s Fundations. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? As stated previously, Fountas and Pinnell running record assessments are used to create groups. The students are assessed 5 times a year so that teachers can use that data to target instructional needs for each student in reading. The TC Writing baseline assessments and performance tasks are used to see what each student has mastered and what each student needs to work on. This occurs at the beginning and end of each writing unit. In Kindergarten, Wilson's Fundations assessment was used to assess a student's alphabet awareness and phonemic awareness. For students that are below grade level on any of the assessments teachers will work closely with those students and provide small group instruction during Reading and Writing lessons. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The first and most important data set that is used to evaluate our programs is the NYSESLAT. We use this assessment to look at how the students are progressing in their speaking, listening, reading, and writing. The second set of assessments that we use to evaluate our programs is our MOSLs. At the end of the year we look at how each student (including ELLs) and class has progressed.Once we see how they have progressed we use the data from the assessments to determine which programs were successful and which programs need to be modified to better address the needs of our ELLs.Since we have a small ELL population we know these students very well. We will use the EDAT as another tool to further determine the needs of each individual student to drive instruction 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] First we will have a Professional Development for the staff to discuss the EDAT. We will discuss what it is, the significance of the findings, and the impact for instruction for each grade. Throughout the year Administration and the ENL coordinator will meet with the staff during common planning sessions to discuss the adjustments that have been made to instruction, how these are addressing the needs of the ELLs in the classroom and if any other resources are needed to better meet the needs of the ELLs in the class. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Integrated ENL instruction occurs using a co-teching model. During these lessons students from one grade are grouped heterogeneously and work on the same task as the class using different strategies depending on their needs. Q300 utilizes a workshop model and an inquiry model for its lessons so depending on the lesson and the independent work the students will receive different scaffolds and supports to help them with their task. Sometimes, the ELLs will receive instruction in their small group and remain together to work on the specific skill they just learned. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Not Applicable Part IV: ELL Programming 1  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Not Applicable b. TBE program. If applicable. The ELLs at Q300 are Expanding and Commanding so all of the instruction needs to be integrated. We have programmed our ENL teacher to be with the classromm teachers who have ELLs in their classroom in order to meet the mandated number of instructional minutes for each student. We programmed each student based on the CR Part 154-2 chart that establishes the number of minutes of integrated instruction each student must have at the Expanding and Commanding levels. c. DL program. If applicable. Second language development is fostered by utilizing content specific materials to address the conventions of standard English, knowledge of the English language and vocabulary acquisition, which are all a part of the NYS Common Core Language Standards. Across the content areas, the ESL teacher makes use of varied instructional approaches to enrich language development. Manipulatives, realia and pictures are used on a regular basis. Total Physical Response along with songs are emphasized in the early childhood grades. The use of technology (laptops, Promethian Boards and ELMOs) and hands-on learning is encouraged. ELL students engage in activities across the content areas which focus on all four modalities of language (listening, speaking, reading, and writing). Content area instruction is delivered in ESL with an emphasis placed on academic language, specialized vocabulary, grammar and comprehension of fiction and nonfiction texts.Teachers of ELLs would utilize the writer’s workshop model using genuine literature, trade books, and guided reading literature. Teacher generated materials such as charts, graphs and realia provide a print rich classroom environment. The Workshop model mini-lesson provides feedback, introduces concepts, strategies, and addresses the needs of ELLs and accelerates language development. In addition, student teacher conferences provide individualized attention to further meet student needs. Small group instruction would be used to guide students, as well as re-teach and reinforce skills. To teach and support reading and writing skills at the emergent stage of literacy, the Wilson Fundations program is used. The workshop model is also used for writing. ELL-SWD utilize the writing process to develop writing skills. Through participation in modeled and shared writing within small groups, instruction is tailored to students' needs. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Due to our students' variety of home languages, students are not evaluated in their native languages. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. A. Due to Q300 being a city wide G&T school, the number of students that are SIFE, Newcomer, Developing and Long Term ELL at Q300 is minimal. Our plan for these students is to provide them with extra support in the classroom. They are provided with intervention services which include extra practice in reading, writing and test taking skills. They are exposed to high learning critical thinking activities through project based learning. Teachers utilize computers and other forms of technology to provide students with differentiated language practice materials. Technology enhances the strategies use and also increases the interest level of the ELL students B. Newcomer ELLs would receive the same services as a SIFE student. See Part A. 2  C. Developing ELLs would receive the same services as a SIFE student. See Part A. D. Long Term ELLs would receive the same services as a SIFE student. See Part A. E. ELLs who reach proficiency on the NYSESLAT are will continue to receive support services by the ESL teacher who provides services through the push in model in their classrooms for ELA. Former ELLs will also receive support in the form of modified and differentiated tasks designed by both the ESL and classroom teachers. The ESL teacher will also communicate with the classroom teacher of Former ELLs during common planning time to ensure that their classroom instruction is fulfilling their needs as a former ELL. This support will include tasks that will support their language development and will be aligned to the Common Core ELA standards for Language for their grade. Former ELLs will also receive extra time to fin 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Teachers of ELL-SWDs would utilize the writer’s workshop model using genuine literature, trade books, and guided reading literature. Teacher generated materials such as charts, graphs and realia provide a print rich classroom environment. The Workshop model mini-lesson provides feedback, introduces concepts, strategies, and addresses the needs of ELL-SWDs and accelerates language development. In addition, student teacher conferences provide individualized attention to further meet student needs. Small group instruction would be used to guide students, as well as re-teach and reinforce skills. To teach and support reading and writing skills at the emergent stage of literacy, the Wilson Fundations program is used. The workshop model is also used for writing. ELL-SWD utilize the writing process to develop writing skills. Through participation in modeled and shared writing within small groups, instruction is tailored to students' needs. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Q300 ensures that all pedagogues servicing these students are provided with the most current copy of the child's IEP. The teachers become familiar with the goals and needs of the students and plan accordingly utilizing the data obtained through the various assessment tools. The ESL services are determined through the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores. This year, almost all of our classrooms have been equipped with Promethean boards. This tool will be utilized to develop and conduct lessons that will address the learning styles of all students through differentiated instruction. At the same time data is obtained and then analyzed to assure the development of new goals as the students' progress. The four modalities of ENL reading, writing, speaking and listening are addressed through differentiated lessons. Teachers make use of supplemental curriculum materials specifically designed to help students acquire general educational content that meets the standards and benchmarks that apply to all students. At our middle school electives/advisory programs that are of high student interests are provided along with manipulatives, visual aids, varied lengths of time for a student to master or complete the content and encourage advanced learners to pursue topics in greater depths. We try to ensure evaluation and data collection takes place regularly so that flexible groupings and scheduling accommodations are carried out as needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Based on our Wilson's fundations assessments and our Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments, we see a need for phonics instruction as well as Guided reading instruction for ELLs specifically Expanding ELLs who still have not shown proficiency in English. During guided reading students receive assistance in guided reading strategies as well as phonemic awareness if students need it.For Math, teachers provide small group instruction to ELLs and for students all who need further help. This included the uses of manipulatives and pictures to help ELLs and visual learners.For Social Studies and Science, teacher also provide small group instruction after the lesson to help ELLs and other struggling students. During this time students would receive more focused attention on the particular areas of need based on the data given from sumative and formative assessments. All instruction for intervention services will be in English. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 3  Based on our data this year we will have a push in professional development for our staff that have to do with scaffolds and differentiation in implementing the CCLS in connection with SWD and ELLs. Currently Q300 has 17 ELLs which is the most the school has had in its history. We want to be sure that the staff knows how to address the needs of each student and know that this will help to meet that goal. As a school we will also be focusing on instructional strategies on performance assessments. This is important to every grade not just "testing grades" since all grades must take MOSLs and all ELLs must take the NYSESLAt at the end of the year. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Not Applicable 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? All students have an equal opportunity to any of the programs offered. Whenever an activity is about to start we send notification home to students. For ELLs we notify parents in the parent's home language. So far Q300 has added a Chess program where some of our ELLs have joined. Our building also has an after school program (Serious Fun) that is offered to eveyone in the school. As we grow we will offer more programs based on student and parent requests. These programs will be offered to all students and will be offered in the student home language. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Q300 provides a variety of materials that are used to support all of our students in their learning. Our philosophy is for students to experiment and discover things through hands-on learning. In Science students will be learning through experiments and field trips both of which provide ELLs with real life experience that supports their learning of the language. For Math our school is using the Investigations curriculum. This curriculum provides students with hands on materials and manipulatives that help ELLs learn by experimenting on their own. In both subjects students discuss what they are learning in their small group and with the whole class which helps ELLs learn proper language models and an opportunity to practice their speaking and listening skills. In ELA, ELLs use Sentence Starters, Graphic Organizers and Realia to help develop their speaking, reading and writing skills 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our school offers ESL as per the parents choice on the Parent Surveys. The way we support the native language of our students is by having a Native Lanugage library in the different languages that are represented in the school. We will continue to build the amount of books and the different languages available throughout the years. As our school grows our library will grow as well to meet the needs of our students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL provider that works with each ENL student discusses the required services and support that each student needs with his or her classroom teacher. Each teacher discusses the needs of each student and their required services so that they are provided with that service or reqource. The ENL teacher also ensures that each ENL students is provided with the resources they need in each of the subjects taught. For example students are grouped by their reading level and provided with books on their reading level so they always have an appropriately leveled book with them in school and at home. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Q300 is in constant communication with our co-located school regarding new policies, procedures and field supports that are provided by the BFSC. We also would like to arrange for a ENL teacher visitation to see how scaffolds and differentiation is used in other classrooms and different schools. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Not Applicable 4  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Spanish is given to all students at Q300. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Not Applicable 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Q300 Professional Development Program will focus on providing teachers with scaffolding and differentiated instruction strategies for teaching English Language Learners. A tremendous focus will be placed on techniques best used to prepare ELLs to meet and exceed the NYC and NYS performance and learning standards. As well as increasing achievement scores on city and statewide tests. Teachers will receive 8 hours of ENL training and will meet the 7.5 hours mandated by the NYS Education Department. The participating teachers will receive 4 sessions of professional development as allocated in the school professional development calendar. The staff members attending these sessions will receive agendas and resources indicating their participation and number of hours obtained. Q300 will maintain a record of attendance signed by the participating members. Additionally copies of the agendas will be filed. Topics that will be addressed during these professional development sessions are as follows: -November: One 2-hour professional development session will be devoted to Scaffolding Across the Content Areas: Types of Scaffolds. -December: One 2-hour professional development session devoted to prepare ELLs to meet the city and state standards and to gain a clear understanding of the NYSESLAT -January: One 2-hour professional development session will be devoted to Differentiated Instruction Strategies and Implementation of the CCLS. -February: One 2-hour professional development will be devoted to ELA and Mathematical instructional strategies to develop and enhance students skills and performance on city and state assessments. Additionally, the ESL coordinator on staff will use the DELLS emails to find out about professional developments throughout the school year. These professional developments will serve as the ELL specific training he needs to obtain. If staff is not able to attend the PDs given by the DELLS then the ESL teacher will turn key this information during Monday's PD time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? As stated before the schedule above will meet our professional development (PD) requirements as per 154.2. The schedule stated above will meet the hourse required. Each PD will include an agenda to outline what the PD will be about as well as an attendance to keep record of who was there. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In the middle of the year the ENL coordinator will create a schedule so they can meet with each parent of an ELL to discuss the individual progress and goals of their child. This meeting will include any assessments (such as F&P reading levels and TC 5  Writing On Demands), student work, and conference notes to discuss how the student has made progress and what the student needs to do to meet their end of year goals in all of the content areas. To meet the communication needs of the parents steps must be taken at the beginning of the school year. During this time the ENL coordinator reviews the HLIS to know which families prefer to communicate in another language. If the parent prefers to communicate in another language it is noted, the child's teacher is notified and future communications will be in the parents preffered language of communication. If translation or interpretation services are needed the school will use staff to provide them. If a staff member is not able to provide them then these needs will be fulfilled by The Big Word. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Q300 has a strong community and a very involved PTA. Throughout the year parents of all children attend PTA meetings and school functions to help foster and build this strong community. At the beginning of the year the school hosts a welcome picnic to both old and new students so families can get to know and connect with the community as a whole. Throughout the year classroom host celebrations and workshops to communicate with parents about what the students are working on in the classroom and the strategies that children can use at home to stregthen student understanding. During all of these school functions all parents and students, including parents of ELLs, are encouraged to attend to become a part of the Q300 community Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 30 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Vasilios Biniaris Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 30 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, 30Q300, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Vasilios Biniairis School DBN: 10/31/2017 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Anna Milonakis Title Principal Dora Fiotodimitrakis Assistant Principal Edwin Mora Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maria Kakakios Parent Teacher/Subject Area Christine Katzartis Teacher/Subject Area 10/31/17 S & E Coordinator Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/31/2017 10/31/2017 10/30/2017 10/31/17 Guidance Counselor Erika Ball 10/31/2017 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q300 School Name: Q300 - 30 Superintendent: Philip Composto The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The LAC conducts Home Langauge Identification Surveys for all new students. On all emergnecy contact cards, families denote their preferred language for communication. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language English and Chinese Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 9  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We provide translated documents from the Office of Student Health and other DOE office. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide During parent teacher conferences and other family meetings, we provide access to an interpreter or utlize the interpreter hotline. interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 0  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our School Leadership Team surveys families yearly to ascertain how well included they feel. Language access is one of these topics. 1 
