 28Q303 School Name: THE ACADEMY FOR EXCELLENCE THROUGH THE ARTS Principal: BARBARA LETO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: The Academy for Excellence through the Arts 342800010303 BEDS Code: Grades Served: Pre-K through 3rd grade School Number (DBN): 28Q303 School Address: 108-55 69th Avenue Forest Hills, New York 11375 Phone Number: 7184591358 Fax: 718-830-3253 School Contact Person: Susan Gallo Email Address: SGallo@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Barbara Leto Laura Ugbomah Ashley Salazar Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Susan Gallo Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 28 Mabel Sarduy Superintendent: 90-27 Sutphin Blvd, Jamaica, NY 11435 Superintendent’s Office Address: msarduy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-557-2618 Phone Number: District 28 FSC: 718-557-2623 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Marlene D. Wilks Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd. Queens, NY 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address:   mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-281-3259 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Barbara Leto Laura Ugbomah Ashley Salazar N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Susan Gallo Deana Bates Helen Tsihlas *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Assistant Principal Member/Teacher Member/Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Anne Marie Vasilakis Member/Teacher Katy Chiu VartgesSaroyan Michele Molfetta Maria Scoloveno IlyseSisolak Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The Academy for Excellence through the Arts (AEA) is a proposal school that opened in September of 2008. The school’s mission statement focuses on the belief that all children are gifted and have a natural desire to learn, imagine, explore, and create. Our school is unique in that we strive to offer our children an academically rigorous program with a well-balanced Theater Arts program consisting of drama, dance, music, and art. Our teachers, parents   and the community at large have high expectations and are committed to the personal, academic, and social growth of all our students. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Since its inception, AEA has been a strong community based institution with a dedicated staff, highly involved parent community, and students who are eager to learn. The Academy for Excellence through the Arts prides itself on nurturing the wonderful school community that we have built over the last nine years. Teachers, parents/caregivers, and students alike work hard to maintain academic excellence through ongoing professional development led by faculty, parents, and community based organizations. Some of the strategic collaborations that have contributed to the continuous development of our school include partnerships with community based organizations such as Wingspan Arts, The Apollo Theater, NY POPS, 92nd Street Y, Atria, etc. The ability for school leaders to identify, encourage, and nurture talent from within our own school community has led to the implementation of Enrichment Clubs, “On Stage”, parent led workshops for both teachers and parents, and professional learning facilitated by in-house staff. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our student population includes students who are ELL’s, students with disabilities, and those who received related services. These groups benefit from differentiated instruction, visual aids, hands on activities, language support practices and small group instruction. Another special student population that has become a large component of the makeup of the students at AEA includes children who are consistently performing above grade level. This population poses special challenges for our school in that we are charged with the task of covering all grade specific content while providing enrichment and extension opportunities that challenge these students. We provide opportunities for our higher achieving students to delve deeper into the material and extend their learning beyond the average grade level expectations. One example of this type of enrichment is the development of a year-long unit of study on the Harlem Renaissance which culminates in the students embodying performers of that era for a living museum presentation for families through “A Night at the Apollo”. Other examples include author studies becoming dramatic stage performances, Native American units of study transforming classrooms into museums, etc. This type of immersion into various content areas has proven successful for the learning needs of all of our students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools Report 2018 in which AEA has made the most progress in the past year are in the areas of Rigorous Instruction and Supportive Environment where we scored 100% across the board. Through professional development opportunities and strategic partnerships, the faculty of AEA has become skilled at comprehensibly aligning units of study to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and instructional shifts, and embedding cognitive processes that ground deep thinking. In-house teacher inter-visitation opportunities have provided staff the opportunity to observe best practices in a variety of subject areas and content specific application. This collaboration has resulted in students across grade levels having extensive opportunities to explore, create, and engage in project-based and hands-on learning experiences. The key areas for focus in the upcoming school year are Collaborative Teachers and Effective Leadership. Special attention will continue to go toward the quality of professional development, as well as, Inclusive Leadership and Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction. Professional development will be designed to take on a more thematic focus and will aid in the development of a stronger professional community that focuses on student learning 0  as its main priority. Highlighting the importance of collective responsibility among all staff members will guide this work and result in strengthening the framework element of Collaborative Teachers. The element of Effective Leadership will be addressed by administration, teachers, and parents with regard to inclusive leadership. This element received the lowest score of 93% in the Framework for Great Schools Report 2018. A goal is to have numerous teachers take on lead roles in data analysis, technology and aligning curricula to key standards. Special initiatives and goals that will focus on building capacity within the many facets of the school community are expected to enhance reciprocal responsibilities between administrators, teachers, and students. This work will contribute to strong leadership and collaborative skills where staff/families positively shape instruction and student achievement. The School Leadership Team will pay special attention to program coherence when making programming and budgetary decisions throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Looking at our programs through the lens of inclusive and facilitative leadership, all school community stakeholders will be empowered to have their opinions voiced and will further become integral components of the instructional leadership within the school. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q303 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 207 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 1 8 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 25.0% % Attendance Rate 19.8% % Reduced Lunch 0.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 17.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 35.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.25 0% 31% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 97.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 2 2 8 96.2% 4.8% 11.6% 5.3% 38.6% 2.4% 2 0% 3.9 97.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. MCLASS Reading 3D is our formal reading assessment. This year we witnessed a great growth in our children’s reading scores. The 2017-2018 End of the Year (EOY) results reported that 88% of our children from grades K-3, including our Special Education and ELL students, are performing at or above grade level in reading. The grade specific breakdown is as follows:  Kindergarten: 96%    Third Grade: 92% First Grade: 86% Second Grade: 80% The reading 3D system allows teachers to group children based on areas of strength as well as areas in which they need more support. Reading 3D provides two types of assessments: Benchmark and Progress Monitoring. The Benchmark assessments are given three times a year to identify student’s instructional level. The Progress Monitoring assessments are administered in between Benchmark assessments and are used to track progress of individual student’s areas of weakness and changes in reading levels. Reading 3D measures initial sound fluency, letter naming fluency, phoneme segmentation fluency, nonsense word fluency, oral reading fluency, word use fluency, text reading and comprehension that include: print concepts, reading behaviors, and oral/written comprehension. This diagnostic tool is used to inform and individualize instruction for our youngest learners. By creating skill groups based on the data that is generated through the reading 3D system, we have observed that our students have met benchmark goals in all literacy areas by differentiating instruction for all our learners. Data sources include: Individual teacher interviews  MCLASS End of Year assessment data   Vertical Teacher Teams  Consultation with the School Leadership Team  Consultation with collaborative Multi-Grade Teams  Analysis of student work products When looking at data trends, we noticed that the most improvement was noted with our Kindergarten students. The percentage of students reading at or above grade level increased from 92% in 2016-2017 to 96% in 2017-2018. The only variation that occurred during the 2017-2018 school year was the implementation of the STEAM program here at 3  AEA. We feel that a portion of this improvement can be credited to this new initiative within the Kindergarten classrooms. Due to this evidence, we will be continuing our STEAM focus into a school wide initiative for the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 60% of classroom teachers will be engaged in content specific professional learning groups in order to develop six academically rigorous, STEAM embedded, CCLS/Scope and Sequence aligned units of study in science resulting in a 15% increase in the number of teachers rated highly effective in domain 1. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Common Core Learning Standards and Pacing calendars will be developed for STEAM units of study. The balanced literacy approach will be used in all classrooms. This model will include daily read alouds, shared reading, partner reading, independent reading, and content specific literature and periodicals. Kindergarten – 3rd grade classes. Conversations and consultation with the ENL coordinator, Special Education providers, classroom teachers and school leaders occur to determine the strategies required to address the needs of SWD, ELL, and other high-need student subgroups. Using reading, writing, listening and speaking focused activities as the foundation the STEAM lessons, including differentiation, will serve as the basis for all unit development. Kindergarten – 3rd grade classes. Professional Development with a STEAM focus will be delivered during Monday Professional Learning time, teacher study groups, and Lunch and Learns. Teachers will share common preps 2 to 3 times per week where they plan as a grade to enhance and differentiate instruction/lessons for all our learners. Professional Development on the Common Core Standards/STEAM curriculum. Classroom teachers and additional staff whose assignments include K-3 students. The administrative staff will oversee the professional learning and curriculum development along with the vertical teacher teams. ENL coordinator, Special Education, teacher, Speech and Language Pathologist, and school administrators will work together to oversee the development of the curriculum as it pertains to students in particular subgroups. School leaders, grade/vertical teams and the School Leadership Team will be closely monitoring the development and implementation of the STEAM curriculum. Professional Learning activities will begin in Nov 2018. Sessions will be scheduled through Jan 2019. Consultation with stakeholders will begin in Nov 2018 and will continue until June 2019. Consultation will begin during our September 2017 PD sessions. An update will be scheduled for discussion during our February 2019 PD sessions. 5 n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement n/a n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Curriculum Night is the first event in September that invites families to learn about the academic structures and assessment practices that are implemented at our school. Parents and caregivers are given detailed explanations and examples of the grade specific expectations for their child. Parents will be informed as to the school wide STEAM initiative, opportunities for families to observe/participate in STEAM lessons, and how they can support their children at home. Various workshops throughout the year (e.g.: Testing meeting – Jan; “On Stage with Mrs. Leto” – monthly; Parent workshops – Nov, Feb, April) are designed to meet the needs of families and to fully engage them in their child’s education. Teachers, school based support team members, and parent coordinator are the designated personnel to deliver this information and ensure that all parents are informed and included. School administrators will be responsible for insuring proper implementation and oversight of these family engagement activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources needed include: Scheduling Professional Learning times for Monday afternoons between September and June   Classroom libraries STEAM Units   MCLASS data  Trade books  Charts Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 30% of classroom teachers will be engaged in content specific professional learning groups and will have developed three academically rigorous, STEAM embedded, CCLS/Scope and Sequence aligned units of study resulting in a 7% increase in the number of teachers rated highly effective in domain 1. 6  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Progress will be assessed using summative and formative assessments. Formative assessments will occur three times per year in the form of MCLASS testing. The initial beginning of year (BOY) assessment will serve as an initial benchmark. A mid-year (MOY) and an end of year (EOY) assessment will be the instrument of measure used to assess the progress of this goal. Summative assessments will be ongoing throughout the school year and will include baseline assessments and STEAM task exit slips to determine success and next steps. Data from these instruments will aid in modifying the programming as needed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? An examination of the most recent data sources occurred in order to paint a picture of our school’s environment with regard to students feeling supported, safe, and challenged at school. Data collected from the 2017/18 Environmental Survey revealed  96% of families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school.  96% of families say that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school.  94% of families say that their school offers a wide enough variety of courses, extracurricular activities and services to keep their child interested in school.  94% of families say that the principal/school leader works to create a sense of community in the school.  94% of families say agreed that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn.  98% of families say that at their school their child is safe.  97% of families say that their child’s school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand.  97% of families say that they are satisfied with the response they get when they contact their school. These statistics can be contributed to the fact that each student has several staff members who know them extremely well, as well as the staff having developed a good rapport with their students’ families. Teachers respect a “24 hour rule” in which all parent communication must be addressed within 24 hours of receipt of an email, note, phone call, etc. This practice keeps the lines of communication between home and school open and free flowing. This level of contact with students and families has created an environment of support and respect. An additional piece of data that supports the above mentioned statistics is the insignificant number of student behavior related OORS reports that have been generated from 2008-2018, most of which occurred off of school grounds, e.g. school bus. Positive reinforcement has been a successful strategy that has been used at AEA to support positive decision making skills among our students. Several excellent approaches have been implemented in individual classes. For example, one class has modified the green/yellow/red behavior chart to include a blue section that is reserved for students who go above and beyond what is expected in the classroom with regard to behavior and kindness to others. A few classes use a “Compliment Chart” where stickers are earned and placed on the grid when the class receives a compliment from a staff member other than the classroom teacher, e.g. specialty teacher, school secretary, administrator, custodian, etc. One Kindergarten classes implemented a “Warm Fuzzy” system where compliments are translated into pompoms being collected in a jar. When a designated number of compliments, stickers, or warm fuzzies are achieved, the class receives a prize to celebrate their kindness and exceptional conduct. This system has proven to be a powerful tool in developing positive practice within those classrooms. 8  Expanding the reward system for the 2018-2019 school year to include acknowledgement of individual student behavior will help to build upon the atmosphere of goodwill, tolerance, and friendship that we strive to maintain here at AEA. This expansion however, will require further development and focus for the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of classrooms will utilize an “I’m as Good as Gold” reward system in order to promote positive behavior among individual students as measured by a 2% increase in a positive response to question 1 on the Classroom Behavior section of the School Quality Report. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monthly consultation meetings with classrooms teachers who utilize this form of reward system in their classrooms and their opinions on best practices with regard to finding ways to further the implementation of this initiative. Students grades Pre-K to 3 October 2018-June 2019 Bimonthly meetings to focus on the development of reward ideas that include input from families and students will be earned by students who reach a designated number of “Gold Coins”, e.g. breakfast with the staff member of their choice; a trip to the treasure chest. Students grades Pre-K to 3 October 2018-June 2019 Classroom teachers, school aide, lunchroom personnel Classroom teachers, school aide, parent coordinator, lunchroom personnel, PTA members Mid-point benchmark will occur the first week of February 2019. The instrument of measure will be 50% of classes, grades PreK-3, will have students represented as evidenced by gold coins collected in the classrooms. All parties involved with this goal will analyze school progress and consult with administrators as to the progress being made toward the intended goal to be achieved by June 2019. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students grades Pre-K to 3 October 2018-February 2019 Classroom teacher, school aide, lunchroom personnel N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will receive information regarding the “I’m as Good as Gold” reward system during our first Meet the Teacher/Curriculum Night event in September. Updates will be available to families at PTC events in November, March and May. Administration, classroom teachers, and lunchroom personnel will be responsible for implementation and oversight of this initiative. The aforementioned staff will carry a supply of gold coins with them throughout the day so that students can be rewarded immediately when they are observed behaving well. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 0  ● Charts, grids, and poster campaign to advertise and inform students of this continued initiative. ● Gold coins, posters/fabric, paint for classroom displays. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 45% of classrooms will utilize an “I’m as Good as Gold” reward system in order to promote positive behavior among individual students as measured by a 2% increase in a positive response to question 1 on the Classroom Behavior section of the School Quality Report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The “I’m as Good as Gold” displays in the classrooms will be the instruments used to assess the progress of this goal. Monthly calculations will be taken by the Parent Coordinator beginning in Nov 2018 and results will be shared with the administration. Data will be broken down by grade to assess which grades are excelling and which grades need additional encouragement. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the data gathered from the 2018 Framework for Great Schools, an area of focus that requires continued focus for the upcoming school year is Effective School Leadership. Data showed strength in the subcategories of Instructional Leadership, Program Coherence, and Teacher Influence with all areas receiving 100% positive response. It should be noted that the 100% positive responses were in all areas where the teachers were group giving feedback regarding the effectiveness of the school leadership. The area in need of additional focus and support would be the subcategory of Inclusive Leadership. This area included questions that the feedback was received from parents. This subcategory received a 93% positive rating with 89% of families saying that the principal is strongly committed to shared decision making. This data shows that the alterations made to our school wide PD plan for teachers throughout this school year as yielded very positive results. All of the areas of focus from the 2017-2018 school year have yielded a positive response rate of 100%. Professional development will continue to move from short-term topics to concepts that are sustained and coherently focused. Specific topics which address strategies for inclusive leadership with families will be embedded into the Monday Professional Learning sessions. Professional development will provide teachers with the support they need in order to focus on and enhance student learning and parent engagement. Student academic success is enhanced when teachers experience powerful professional support and parent’s feel empowered to make an impact on their children’s education. The guiding principles for professional development for the 2018-2019 school year will include:  A focus on student learning; differentiated instruction, learning styles, etc. as it applies to Sanford Harmony integration into unit plans.  Cultural awareness professional articles and webcasts.  Trust building activities; teacher-principal trust; teacher-teacher trust; and home-school trust.  Building confidence, respect, and effective communication among all faculty members and families.  Alignment of professional development with the CCLS and its integration into current units of study.  Evaluation of teaching practices through the Danielson Framework.  Data driven, collaborative decision making to enhance teacher practice and student achievement  Data on student achievement will be analyzed to ensure that needs of applicable subgroups are being met (e.g.: ELLs, SWD).  Professional collaboration and support.  Systematic evaluation of professional development as it translates into classroom implementation and practice and evidenced through formal and informal observations. The goal will be for the continued enhancements of the professional development in its design to take on a more thematic focus which includes cultural awareness and inclusive classroom instruction and will aid in the development of a stronger professional community and school commitment that focuses on student learning as its main priority. 2  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 40% of professional development sessions will address issues surrounding social-emotional learning and inclusive classroom instruction through the Sanford Harmony program and will be measured by teacher created, multiple entry point tasks, observable lessons, and professional learning agendas. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Expansion of the Professional Development Collaborative Team (PDC) to share decision making process for assessing needs and focus areas for PD sessions. Principal will turnkey information that was received at the district level with regard to district foci 4.1 and 4.2. Development of cohesive, thematic professional development sessions using multi-media resources. Focus on strategies to address needs of specific subgroups (i.e.: ELLs, SWD) will take place when developing overall plan. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrators, teachers, paras August 2018 – October 2018 Principal, Assistant Principal Administrators, teachers, paras Sept 2018 – June 2019 Principal, AP, PDC Team Adjustment to teaching staff to include Sanford Harmony Unit integration to support cultural awareness and inclusion. Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, hiring team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to observe Sanford Harmony lessons as well as after-school workshops that families can attend to continue the social emotional learning at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources needed include:    Scheduling Professional Learning times for Monday and Tuesday afternoons between September and June. Scheduling preparatory time for inter-visitation and coaching opportunities. Instructional resources for the implementation of the collegial lesson critique; e.g. iPad, lesson plan, Smartboard, document camera, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 4  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 20% of professional development sessions will have addressed issues surrounding social-emotional learning and inclusive classroom instruction through the Sanford Harmony program. Teacher created lessons and professional learning agendas will be examined to assess progress toward goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By January 2019 progress assessment surveys will be analyzed to check if at least 20% of professional development sessions have addressed concepts that are coherently focused in the area of cultural awareness and inclusive classroom instruction. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the data gathered from the Framework for Great Schools Report 2018, an area of focus in the upcoming school year is Effective Leadership. In order to address this area, special attention will go toward increasing the level of teacher inclusion through the expansion of our Instructional Review Cohort. This group of teachers will include multiple grades to look at programming and unit effectiveness. The expansion of our Instructional Review Cohort (IRC) will provide a venue for administrators and teachers to come together and examine specific programs/units of study used in the classrooms. This team will go beyond the usual discussions that occur within Teacher Team meetings to the actual observation of programs in action. This design will give teachers exposure to grades they may never have taught and create a more cohesive view of successful programming. A specific focus that will be shared with the Instructional Review Cohort will be the research that has shown evidence of best practices employed by effective school leaders: Shape a vision of academic success for all students   Create a climate hospitable to education  Cultivate leadership in others   Manage people, data, and processes to foster school improvement  Develop avenues in which families can be included in key decision making activities Improve instruction Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 40% of teaching staff will be participants in the Instruction Review Cohort as evidenced by meeting agendas, program surveys and participation logs. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teaching staff will be invited to join the Instructional Review Cohort during the 2018-2019 school year. The IRC will meet 3 time throughout the school year and focus on the development of principal instructional leadership, specifically, Inclusive Leadership, as noted for improvement based on the Framework for Great Schools Report 2018. Classroom teachers A triannual visit schedule will be set up to give IRC members the opportunities to observe lessons in various content areas and share feedback with fellow teachers and administrators. Classroom teachers Members will discuss and assess current issues in education and the implementation of content specific activities in the classrooms. Strategies to address needs of ELLs and SWD will be included in the discussion and implementation as applicable. Teachers November 2018, February 2019, May 2019 November 2018, February 2019, May 2019 December 2018 – May 2019 Principal, AP, IRC participants Principal, AP, IRC participants Principal, AP, IRC participants N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents/Caregivers will receive information regarding the Instruction Review Cohort during our first School Leadership Team in September. Administration and IRC members will be responsible for implementation and oversight of this initiative. Periodic updates and data findings will be presented during SLT meetings in alignment with the triannual visit schedule that will be followed by the IRC. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7  Resources needed include: Scheduling Professional Learning times for Monday and Tuesday afternoons between September and June. Scheduling preparatory time for inter-visitation and program assessment opportunities.    Materials for the implementation of the unit of study critique; e.g. iPad, lesson plan, Smartboard, document camera, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 20% of teaching staff will be participants in the Instruction Review Cohort as evidenced by meeting agendas, program surveys and participation logs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Participant notes and observations will be analyzed in order to assess the program’s viability and impact on teacher practices and ultimately, student learning. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to data reported in the 2018 Framework for Great Schools Report, AEA received a score of 96% in positive responses in questions related to Strong Family and Community Ties. We are focusing this years on areas that were less than 95% in favorable responses that the school can improve on to create additional opportunities for families to volunteer and attend school activities. 91% of families said that they have had an opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. 94% of families said that they were invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction. 94% of families said that teachers work closely with them to meet their child’s needs. This data is a clear indication that the programs and events that have been put in place to support and enhance the element of Strong Family and Community Ties have been extremely successful. AEA strives to maintain a strong Home/School connection through collaboration with our Parent Teacher Association, School Leadership Team, and through many activities that promote parent involvement. Parent involvement opportunities have been securely in place at AEA for the past several years and events currently celebrated include: Literacy Night with the First Grade “On Stage”  Curriculum Night  Classroom Publishing parties  Open School Week activities  Pancake Breakfast    Variety of evening performances    Harlem Renaissance Parent Night   Dance Troupe Performance  Winter and Spring classroom celebrations   AEA Food Bazaar  Museum Walks Stepping-up ceremonies School-wide Family Picnic STEAM Family Science Buddies Family workshops given by school providers, Parent Coordinator and PTA Although we already have a multitude of opportunities for parents to visit and participate in various school activities, there is always a need to increase these opportunities. As per Schools Chancellor’s Pillar 3, we aim to increase the frequency of parent workshop, conferences so that parents/caregivers can learn more about their children’s education and have access to the school community on a regular basis. To this end we have added several new events and committees for the parent community to take part in and solidify the bonds that already exist at AEA. Some of these events include:   Science Buddies School Buddies 9   Class Parent  Academic Review Team (ART)  Cultural events to celebrate our diversity “CASA Korean Dance” The goal of these events is to collaborate with teachers and students during scheduled classroom lessons. Families will have an opportunity to will and assist with the academic program in various subject areas in order to gain a firsthand look at how their children learn throughout the day. Families are an indispensable asset that is needed for the success of any school. These additional, innovative parent involvement opportunities will aid in fostering the welcoming, open-door policy that exists within our school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 15% of AEA parents/caregivers will take part in the “School Buddies” collaborative initiative to observe and assist during quarterly classroom lessons in grades Pre-K – 3 as evidenced by parent participation rosters. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Consultation with the Parent Teacher Association President occurred to assess the needs and interests of our parent community with regard to parent involvement activities within the school. Parents / Caregivers Sept 2018-June 2019 Consultation with School Leadership Team to discuss goals and new initiatives to enhance the Home/School Connection. Parents / Caregivers Sept 2018-June 2019 Translations services will be available upon request for ELL parents in order to promote full school community involvement. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents / Caregivers Sept 2018 - June 2019 PTA, school administration, teacher representatives. SLT, school administration, classroom teachers, specialty teachers. ENL Coordinator If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Thrive NYC Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher/supervisor per session in order to work with parents/caregivers after regular school hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1  By February 2019, 7% of AEA parents/caregivers will have taken part in the “School Buddies” collaborative initiative and will have observed and assisted in two classroom science lessons in grades Pre-K – 3 as evidenced by parent participation rosters. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will indicate achievement of this goal will be participation rosters and parent/caregiver feedback regarding School Buddies workshops and classroom participation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students performing below grade level (scoring a Level 1 on report card) receive AIS. Grade : K: <Print Concepts 1st : <Level C 2nd : <Level G 3rd : <Level K Students performing below grade level on various math assessments in concept specific areas (e.g. <65% average on assessments on multiplication equations) Students performing below grade level on various science assessments. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Guided reading ● Small group ● Reteach ● One-to-one ● Vocabulary building ● Tutoring ● Modified materials ● Visual cues Services are provided: ● In class during reading and writing workshops ● Before school during Breakfast Club sessions ● Math Centers ● Small group ● Concept specific activities and practice ● Flash cards ● One-to-one ● Tutoring ● Scientific Method tasks ● Writing in content area ● Small group ● One-to-one ● Tutoring Services are provided: ● In class during math workshop ● Before school during Breakfast Club sessions Services are provided: ● In class during science workshop ● Science Enrichment Club 3  Social Studies Students performing below grade level on various social studies assessments. ● Literacy through Art and Music ● Writing in content area ● Small group ● One-to-one ● Tutoring At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● Social-emotional development is impacting academic progress ● Counseling ● Push-in ● Speech ● Pull-out ● SETSS ● Small group ● Parent concerns for child’s progress ● One-to-one Services are provided: ● In class during social studies workshop and Literacy through Art and Music Services are provided: ● During the school day 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5 Educational materials will be requested through PTA discretionary funds. Additional academic support will be provided as needed through AIS and RTI services. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 7  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 8  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Academy for Excellence through the Arts, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Academy for Excellence through the Arts will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 0  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 1  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Academy for Excellence through the Arts, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support 2  of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School. (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 3  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 4  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 5  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name The Academy for Excellence through the A Borough Queens School Number 303 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Barbara Leto Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Susan Gallo Teacher/Subject Area Laura Ugbomah/CB Teacher/Subject Area Robert De Jesus/CB/ESL Related-Service Provider Chanah Cohen Superintendent n/a Assistant Principal Susan Gallo Coach n/a School Counselor n/a Parent n/a Parent Coordinator Davina Flood Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 170 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.59% 7  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools our school uses to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs are Fountas and Pinnell leveled readers/running records and the MCLASS DYO. Insights received from these assessments are numerous. MCLASS Reading 3D is our formal reading assessment. The reading 3D system allows teachers to group children based on areas of strength as well as areas in which they need more support. Reading 3D provides two types of assessments: Benchmark and Progress Monitoring. The Benchmark assessments are given three times a year to identify student’s instructional level. The Progress Monitoring assessments are administered in between Benchmark assessments and are used to track progress of individual student’s areas of weakness and changes in reading levels. Reading 3D measures initial sound fluency, letter naming fluency, phoneme segmentation fluency, nonsense word fluency, oral reading fluency, word use fluency, text reading and comprehension that include: print concepts, reading behaviors, and oral/written comprehension. This diagnostic tool is used to inform and individualize instruction for our ELLs. By 8  creating skill groups based on the data that is generated through the reading 3D system, we have observed that our students have met benchmark goals in all literacy areas by differentiating instruction for all our learners. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures that are put in place to support this effort is creating teacher schedules which allow for ample time to assess each child. Additionally, common planning time allows for same grade level staff to create and develop lessons and unit plans differentiated for the language needs of our ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The LAP team periodically evaluates the success of our programs and instructional practices for our ELL population. Self-evaluation of our programs, measuring rate of student progress, and consultation with the families are some of the ways this evaluation is conducted. The MCLASS literacy assessment program and the Fundations program are two of the assessment tools that are used to evaluate the success of our ELL program. Student performance on these assessment tools gives a clear picture of which areas are in need of focus for each child and the support necessary for language acquisition. Evaluating programs as to their success in meeting AYP goals for ELLs will be carefully done when we have ELLs in the upper grades after our expansion. At the Pre-K through 3 rd grade level, there is no student data (e.g.: NYS exam scores, benchmark assessments, etc) to assess AYP for ELLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data has been gathered the LAP team meets to review the data and make recommendations. these recommendations are presented by the LAC to classroom teachers. A focus on methods and materials that should be employed as differentiated instructional tools to support all ELLs are highlighted at these meetings. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the RtI framework by allowing for new methods of differentiation. By analyzing data gathered from formative and summative assessments, students are provided with increasingly intensive and targeted instruction. This instruction is designed to match their learning needs as determined through various classroom assessments and consultation with school administrators and teachers. Support for ELLs begins with Tier I for core of instruction, then increases to Tier II which increases the level of instructional intervention. Tier III is the level reached when intensive intervention and support is warranted in small group or 1:1. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across proficiencies and grades show that our ELLs are steadily learning and improving in their second language acquisition. The two ELL children in our school who were classified as Entering and Transitioning, respectively on their NYSITELL and NYSESLAT exams for the 2016-2017 school year showed steady progress in their language acquisition as demonstrated by their levels of proficiency on their MCLASS assessments. Information accumulated through data analysis of NYSESLAT modalities on the RLAT report in ATS showed the students' strengths in the listening/speaking and reading/writing portions of the exam. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? All findings are analysed by the LAC and disseminated to the LAP team. These findings are then disseminated to the relevant staff members at presentations hosted by the LAC. A focus on program adjustments that should be made to support all ELLs are highlighted at these meetings. Part IV: ELL Programming 9  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our program design is two-fold. We offer both a 'push-in' component, as well as a 'pull-out' component to our standalone ENL program. For the ‘push-in’ model, children are blocked by grade. The students are supported and receive service minutes within the class setting. This support is integrated simultaneously while the classroom teacher delivers the lesson. ENL teacher then modifies the directions and task as needed for the ENL student. The ‘pull-out’ portion of the program is designed to be un-graded and children are grouped heterogeneously. Students are grouped together for services with entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding designations working together. Thus, modeling language skills for one another. This stand-alone ENL programming directs instruction to the individual needs of the children being served. Small groups allow for additional one-on-one and partner work support targeted content. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ENL Coordinator holds permanent certification Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages and is here to provide service and ensure that each entitled child receives the mandated number of instructional minutes according to their proficiency level. Each ELL students receives the mandated number of minutes as per CR154 and based on their NYSITELL determination. Our ENL instructional minutes are explicitly delivered through our push-in/pull-out model. Small group and one-to-one work is provided to support children in their second language acquisition. Every child also receives ELA support during their literacy block to fulfill the ELA instruction requirement of 180 mins per week for any child receiving expanding ELL designation. Native language assessment is not part of our standalone ENL program. However, if a child is struggling in a particular academic area, we utilize the assistance of an interpreter to informally assess the child to see if the issue is present in the child’s native language as well. By doing this, we are better able to ascertain the needs of the child, his/her strengths, and in what areas the child would benefit from additional support. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We have adopted the Readers and Writers Workshop model for our Balanced Literacy program. We are using Singapore Math for our math program. We have chosen trade book Social Studies and Science programs. The language for instruction is English. ELLs are full participants in all subject area learning. A few of the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to enrich language development are additional visual aids are provided. Hands on learning and a print rich environment are provided to serve as an additional supports for our ELL students. As per the CCLS's Blueprint for ELLs, teachers working with ELLs are required to design and deliver instruction that is culturally and linguistically appropriate for all diverse learners, including those with Individualized Educational Programs (IEP); provide integrated language and content instruction to support language development through language-focused scaffolds; utilize materials and instructional resources that are linguistically, age/grade appropriate, and align to the standards. Bilingual, ENL, and other content-area teachers must collaborate purposefully and consistently to promote academic achievement in all content areas. 0  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Considering the fact that our school employs the standalone ENL model for instruction, the only native language evaluation given is the Spanish LAB when a native Spanish speaking child does not pass the English version of this assessment tool. In the event that programming choices changes at the school level to include Dual Language or Transitional Bilingual program, then evaluation of native language would change as well. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status At present, the subgroups that are currently part of our population are simply ELL students that fall into the expanding language proficiency designations. Teachers differentiate instruction by implementing various ENL methodologies such as extensive modeling, one-to-one directions, modified materials, clarifying and re-teaching concepts, and pronunciation/linguistic mechanic work. These scaffolding methods are also effective in supporting former ELLs up to two years after they have exited ELL status. At this present time, we do not have any SIFE children. Considering that this is an Early Childhood Center with students grades Pre-K to 3rd, we do not have any children receiving ENL services for 4-6 years or children considered to be Long-Term ELLs. Also, the requirement under NCLB with regard to ELA testing for ELLs after one year is not age appropriate to our school due to the fact that we do not have ELL students in the testing grades. ELLs identified as having special needs are appropriately evaluated and placed in accordance with his/her IEP. All parties join together for consultation in order to determine the best tools and methods for that child. Former ELLs will continue to receive support for up to two years after exiting ELL status. ELLs, both current and former, will receive test accommodations as necessary for exams. An example of these test accommodations would be separate location on state ELA and Math exams. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Grade and age appropriate instructional strategies that teachers implement for our ELLs include physical prompting, varied presentation of materials, re-teach concepts, one-to-one directions, modified materials, etc. Grade-level materials include leveled libraries, visual aides, picture cards, listening centers, as well as manipulatives made available across content areas. Academic support infused with technology, such as use of iPads, is a regular accommodation to support language acquisition. All services and supports provided are required to strictly adhere to the child's IEP goals and accommodations. The SBST and special education teachers closely monitor SWD to ensure that all mandated services are being provided properly (bilingual education, ENL instruction as indicated on all IEPs). 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs identified as having special needs are appropriately evaluated and placed in accordance with his/her IEP. All parties are consulted with for the best tools and methods for that child. All curricular and instructional modifications are designed and implemented based on the individual needs of each student. These students are afforded flexible scheduling in order to accommodate all necessary services; ie: occupational therapy, speech, physical therapy, etc. All services and supports provided are required to strictly adhere to the child's IEP accommodations. Currently we do not have ELL-SWD children who's IEP mandate bilingual instruction. In the event this situation occurs, appropriate placement will be sought and implemented. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs have been put in place for ELLs (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, commanding) in ELA, math, science and social studies. We have instituted small group instruction, focus groups, and guided reading groups, to provided additional support to our LEP students. Learning centers have been created as a part of the workshop model for literacy, math, science and social studies. Several supplemental programs have been put in place of our ELLs including 1  Academic Intervention Service groups and RTI Tiers 1-3 with varying levels of intensive instruction and support. Data is collected and trends are analyzed to assess which types of activities yield higher academic growth of our ELLs. All instruction is conducted in English. Children who have demonstrated proficiency and passed the NYSESLAT continue to have intervention programs and support services available to them for up to two years following the passing of the NYSESLAT. Push-in instruction also incorporates this population so as to continue the academic support for these students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The LAP team members have reviewed several new supplemental programs this school year to assist our children with meeting the new requirements for the Common Core. We have purchased Pebble Go and RAZ Kids which is are online e-book databases designed to aid students of all literacy skill levels to access the curriculum. Data is generated from online assessments to see how ELLs are performing at various levels. We are also purchasing Teacher's College units of study in writing to supplement our literacy program. After implementation of these programs, we will continually monitor their effectiveness and make revisions to our programming as we deem necessary with regard to curriculum, assessment tools, etc. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time we will not be discontinuing any of the programs or services that our ELLs currently receive. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Partnerships have included The 92 nd Street Y, NYC POPS, and Wingspan Arts Artist in Residency. We currently offer the Wingspan Arts after school program. All of the aforementioned programs are available to all students. Every child in the school, including ELLs, have the opportunity to actively participate in all programs offered. Where applicable, parent notifications are sent out to invite students to programs offered outside of the scope of the regular school day. Parent notifications are sent in parent preferred languages as noted on the HLIS form. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In order to provide support services to our ELLs, all children are included in small group instruction, focus groups and guided reading groups. Technology is infused by using language enrichment software, laptops, and iPADS, as well as by introducing children to online resources available to aid with schoolwork. Leveled libraries, literacy/math centers, and modified materials are available to to enhance learning and target students' current academic abilities. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered through bilingual staff members, SFA volunteers, and native language materials which include a growing native language library. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services and resources support and correspond to our ELLs' ages and grade levels. This is done by programs taking into consideration the process and developmental stages of second language acquisition; promoting a collaborative approach among teachers, administrators, and other personnel involved in the education of ELLs; and building on prior knowledge and experience of students to help in their development of age/grade appropriate language, vocabulary, and concepts. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? n/a 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We offer newly enrolled ELL students, and their parents, an orientation session before the start of school. This orientation includes a building and classroom tour for both child and parent to familiarize them with the layout of the school in order to make an easier transition on the first few days of school. This orientation is given by the ENL Coordinator. 2  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Considering elective classes are usually not a part of the Early Childhood education programs, our school has begun Enrichment Clubs for grades K-3. To date, we have offered Italian as a choice for one of our Enrichment Clubs. Children have the opportunity to learn basic vocabulary, food, and culture of Italy. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Specific Professional Development training for all staff is designed around the needs of our ELLs. The specific staff included in this type of professional development include teachers, paraprofessionals, psychologist, OT/PT, speech teacher, school aides, parent coordinator, and secretary. At this time we do not have a guidance counselor. The ENL Coordinator will turnkey all PD that she receives off site. As per the newly adopted regulations stated in CR-154 subparts 1 & 2, the general education staff members who teach these children on a daily basis receive 15% of all PD hours in ELL-specific topics of training. Bilingual and ENL/ENL teachers will receive 50% of all PD training to be geared toward ENL integration of language and content instruction. We will be providing professional development training for teachers to become familiar with ENL methodology and practices best suited for this special population. PD will be conducted by the Principal, Assistant Principal, ENL Coordinator, and guest facilitators. Professional development that focuses on subject matter that is specific to the needs of ELLs will be offered to all teachers. This subject matter will include co-teaching strategies, and integrating language and content instruction. Examples of these activities include sentence building, nouns all around, kooky carnival, and adventure camp. These activities support the CCLS by having students participate in collaborative conversations, add drawings or other visual depictions, demonstrate command of the conventions of written/spoken English, with prompting and support identify sentence elements, etc. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional development sessions that are scheduled for Monday and Tuesday afternoon, as per the UFT contract will be utilized to meet this 15%/50% of PD hours to focus on the specific needs of ELLs, co-teaching strategies, and integrating language and content instruction. Meeting agendas and sign-in sheets will be maintained at the school. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 3  Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school offers regular opportunities for parents to meet with teachers. Annual individual meetings with parents of ELL's are held to discuss goals of the program, their child's language development progress, language assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. These annual meetings are held in addition to the parent orientation and regularly scheduled parent-teacher conferences. Translated versions of all materials are made available in the parent's preferred language as per the RCPL report generated through ATS. All materials are automatically translated into parent's preferred languages if they requested written communication be provided in an alternate language on the HLIS form completed at registration. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Several parent involvement activities have been put in place in this school. Activities are all inclusive to the parent body, both ELL parents as well as non-ELL parents are welcomed. These programs provide many opportunities for parents to become an integral part of their child’s education. Some of these activities include Curriculum Night, ENL Parent Orientation, Art Buddies, Reading/Math Buddies, Literacy/Science Fair, 'On Stage with Mrs. Leto', etc. Translated versions of all materials are made available at every parents request. All materials are automatically translated into parent's native languages if they requested written communication be provided in an alternate language on the HLIS form completed at registration. All aforementioned programs have been designed to foster a very strong Home/School connection. Workshops and services for ELL parents are provided by the ENL Coordinator, parent coordinator, teaching staff, PTA, community organizations, or school administration. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. n/a 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Barbara Leto, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Academy for Excellence thr School DBN: 28Q303 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Barbara Leto Title Principal Susan Gallo Assistant Principal Davina Flood Parent Coordinator Susan Gallo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Davina Flood Parent Laura Ugbomah/CB Teacher/Subject Area Robert De Jesus/CB/ESL Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 9/26//17 09/26/17 09/26/17 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 28Q303 School Name: The Academy for Excellence through Superintendent: Mabel Sarduy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Susan Gallo Assistant Principal Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) is the first piece of data considered when assessing our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs. All parents who come to register their child in our school will fill out a HLIS as part of their registration packet and receive an informal oral interview. This process of filling out the HLIS and participating in an oral interview is applicable to all incoming Kindergarten children, as well as, all children who are being admitted to the NYC Public School System for the first time regardless of age or grade. In the event we find that a translator is needed at this initial interview, either a staff member who speaks the parent's preferred language is brought to the main office or the NYCDOE Translation & Interpretation Unit is contacted. All parent interviews are conducted by Mrs. Gallo, ESL Coordinator. In addition to the initial oral interview that is conducted at the time of registration, written and oral translation needs are assessed by examining Part III of the HLIS - "In what language would you like to receive written information from the school?". The response that parents make for this part of the form gives us the best indication as to the services that will be put in place for each family throughout the school year. Data is also 7  gather for written and oral translation needs from parent letters, emails, and emergency blue cards. When a parent indicates on any form of communication with the school that a relative or caregiver will be picking up their child and this person has limited English proficiency, written translation and oral interpretation accommodations are put in place for that family. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English English n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 100 n/a n/a n/a English n/a n/a n/a 100 n/a n/a n/a 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Welcome letter September Kindergarten Open House Brochure December Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. NYCDOE Translation unit, Staff/Parent translators, The Big Word NYCDOE Translation unit, The Big Word n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 8  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences September, November, March, May Curriculum Night September Hold-over conferences January 3rd Grade Testing Meeting February interpretation service(s)? NYCDOE Translation unit, Staff/Parent translators, The Big Word, over-the-phone interpretation services NYCDOE Translation unit, Staff/Parent translators, The Big Word, over-the-phone interpretation services NYCDOE Translation unit, Staff/Parent translators, The Big Word, over-the-phone interpretation services NYCDOE Translation unit, Staff/Parent translators, The Big Word, over-the-phone interpretation services 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We will employ the use of the Remind app or the Shutterfly email system to send messages in the parent’s preferred languages. Families will then contact the school and speak with designated school personnel in their native language. In the event that that there is not a staff member available to speak the preferred language, the NYCDOE Interpretation Unit will be contacted in order to conduct over-the-phone interpretation services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional development will be provided with all staff members at the beginning of each school year. Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 will be discussed in detail and all staff will receive a list of available resources to assist families as needed. Available services provided by the NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation unit are highlighted as well. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As stated in Chancellor Regulation A-663, all schools and offices are responsible for providing each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who requires language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent 9  Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. These documents have been downloaded and printed from the http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/ParentBillofRights/Parents+Bill+of+Rights+and+Responsiblities.htm link on the DOE website. Our school has posted the Parent Bill of Rights on the PTA bulletin board which is prominently located outside of the main office near the security desk. Our school's safety plan contains procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. Currently we do not have 10% of the children/parents speaking a language other than English or the nine covered languages so additional signage is not necessary at this time. However, if the need does arrive, the ESL Coordinator will make the proper arrangements for additional signage in the designated language or languages. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The PTA surveys the parent body several times a year to gather feedback on how families view the quality and availability of services. Families of new admits throughout the school year are invited to come to school to discuss language needs they may have and to be alerted to the services currently available for them. Additional data is gathered from the parent portion of the Environmental Survey specifically in the areas of school communication and outreach. This data is shared with the administration and the School Leadership Team and language service adjustments are made as needed. 0 
