 24Q307 School Name: PIONEER ACADEMY Principal: CECILIA JACKSON   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Pioneer Academy PS 307 24Q307 342400010307 K-5 School Number (DBN): 40-20 100 Street Corona, New York 11368 718 779 5068 Phone Number: 718 779 5109 Fax: CeciliaJackson Cjackson4@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Cecilia Jackson Erika Mathis Ana Lucero N/A Maria Caraballo N/A NA District Information Geographical District: 24 Superintendent’s Office Address: Madeline Taub-Chan Superintendent: 98-50 50th Ave. Queens, NY 11368 mchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 592 3357 Phone Number: 718.592.3770 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens - District 24 Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director:   28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Cecilia Jackson Erika Mathis Ana Lucero Maria Caraballo N/A N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable MarianelaCabrera - Treasurer EstilitaCuahtepizi - Secretary Georgina Martinez Member/ FTA - Parent Member/ FTA - Parent Member/ FTA - Parent   Lalina Budhu IvonneCintron NemaAhmed Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ FTA - Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Signature (Blue Ink)   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At Pioneer Academy, we are a diverse community of scholars, families, staff and community members dedicated to the academic achievement and personal development of our student body. Our teachers and staff strive to ensure that each scholar, in Kindergarten through Fifth Grade, is empowered and inspired to reach his or her full potential. Scholars are challenged to question, anticipate and solve problems, assume personal responsibilities and emerge as enthusiastic life-long learners and independent thinkers motivated by the pursuit of academic excellence and social responsibility to our local, national and global community.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Pioneer Academy PS 307 is an elementary school located in Community School District 24, in Corona, Queens, New York. Our school has 902 scholars from Kindergarten through Fifth Grade. Our scholar population comprises 95% Hispanic, 2% Asian, 1% African American and 1% White. Our student body includes 42% English Language Learners (ELLs) and 21% are Students with Disabilities (SWDs). At Pioneer Academy we strive to promote a culture of high expectations for all of the school’s constituents by providing supports for teachers, paraprofessionals, mandated service providers, and support staff to achieve these expectations. We believe in promoting shared leadership to improve scholar learning. Teacher teams are provided with opportunities to collaborate using protocols to analyze assessment data in alignment with the CCLS and instructional shifts in order to strengthen instructional capacity. We are committed to establishing partnerships with families to support our scholars’ progress toward college and career readiness. During these sessions, family members are provided with the tools needed to support their children at home. Our Community Coordinator maintains ongoing contact with community organizations that are involved with providing services to the school’s educational program. In an effort to empower our scholars we have begun a mentoring program. Our “at risk” scholars are paired up with volunteer staff members to provide an additional safety net. Scholars then have an open line of communication with an adult, who is committed to building on this relationship and who they can reach out to for support at any time. Throughout our school building, there are several scholars (especially in the 12:1:1 and ICT classrooms) who have challenges with self-regulation (ability to maintain a calm, organized state across demands and transitions), attention, expressive and receptive communication, and task performance. In response to this need we have implemented Move to Improve, The Get Ready to Learn program, and are excited continue an After School Program, Tiger Schulmann's MMA (Mixed Martial Arts), for scholars in 12:1 classrooms in grades 1-3. In an effort to provide as many opportunities as possible to incorporate movement into our instruction our school is using Move to Improve as part of our daily learning. One To World’s Global Classroom program prevents school violence by engaging our scholars in face-to-face discussions and activities with trained international college and university scholars from around the world (“Global Guides”). Global Classroom creates opportunities for Global Guides and NYC youth to connect across cultures, discuss similarities and differences and develop skills to prevent violence and misunderstanding between cultures. One To World’s Global Classroom program at Pioneer Academy, enhances learning and promotes tolerance by providing our scholars with a safe, small-group setting for developing positive peer relationships. The Leadership Program, as per the official website, “empowers our scholars to succeed. Using an engaging, research-based curricula this program addresses the current and evolving needs of our urban school community. This program includes instruction that focuses on: Social-Emotional Learning (SEL), Common Core State Standards (CCSS), Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM), Culminating projects and Service Learning.” Pioneer Academy has embraced 21st century technology to promote collegiate inquiry, transparency, innovation, and creativity. As an ongoing response to the Common Core Instructional Shifts, Pioneer Academy has developed the Pioneer Academy Data Drive (PADD) to provide support, organization, protocol implementation, data analysis, inquiry cycles, and ongoing feedback around assessment and instruction. Throughout the 2017-18 school year we have continued to expand and strengthen our school’s technology infrastructure. Smartboards have been updated to flat panel, LED boards. In our computer lab we have been able to make drastic improvements to our creative hardware. iMacs will be utilized by the technology teacher for various project-based activities that will include film editing, photo editing, coding, and 3D design. To further enhance our 3D design curriculum, we have also added a 3D printer to our computer lab to further expand our scholars' understanding of 3D design. In the 2016-2017 school year we introduced the Makerspace program to our scholars in 0  partnership with Schools That Can (STC) and MakerState. The program introduces scholars to 3D designing, computer programming/coding and rocket science. The acquisition of these computers and 3D printer will also help support several scholar programs which promote STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) concepts. In 2018-2019, we will be expanding this to include the Maker Partnership Program. The Maker Partnership Program will support 3rd, 4th and 5th grade teachers in using maker pedagogy to integrate computer science and computational thinking into elementary science classes. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. At Pioneer Academy, the majority of our ELLs are classified as Expanding. Of the 404 current ELLs 204 have an Expanding proficiency level. This provides us with the opportunity to move 50% of our students to Commanding this year. Across grade levels, most Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding students scored in the mid range on three modalities of the NYSESLAT (Listening, Reading and Writing). Sixty-nine percent of Expanding students scored in the high range on the Speaking modality. Our school population comes predominantly from Central and South America. The majority of our students have a home language of Spanish. Currently, close to 50% of our scholar population are ELLs. Classroom teachers plan for instruction with their ENL provider and classroom support staff (AIS/Coaches). We use EngageNY curricula (Core Knowledge Language Arts, K-2 and Expeditionary Learning, 3-5). All lessons are aligned to Common Core State Standards and teachers can prepare for their ELLs (across proficiency levels) with the Supplemental Guide for ELLs provided for each Domain. Core Knowledge encompasses Language Arts skills as well as a Listening and Learning strand that provides our ELLs with the opportunity to practice all four modalities. English as a New Language (ENL) providers embed language objectives and provide ELL strategies to support students in meeting lesson objectives. At Pioneer Academy, there are approximately 206 students who receive special education and/or related services. These services include Counseling, Occupational Therapy, Speech-Language Therapy, Physical Therapy, Hearing Education Services, Speech and Language Therapy, and Parent Counseling and Training. There are different programs at Pioneer Academy in which our SWDs participate: Self-Contained Classes (12:1:1), Integrated Co-Teaching, Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS), and Adaptive Physical Education (12:1). Services are provided to students in Chinese (Mandarin or Cantonese), English or Spanish. Testing Accommodations for students include Breaks, Extended Time, On-Task Focusing Prompts, Questions Read and Re-read Aloud, Separate Location/Room, Test Read and Re-read Aloud, Use of Scribe, Use of Aids and Assistive Technology Device. Promotional Criteria is also modified for some students, as appropriate. No students participate in Alternative Assessments. Students who are Economically Disadvantaged are approximately 95% of the student body, and are eligible for reduced or free lunch. If students have not had the opportunity to eat breakfast at the allotted time, teachers ensure that they are able to eat breakfast in the morning, before starting their day. The Guidance Counselor is available to all students in the building. Students feel comfortable discussing with her any social or academic issues that they may have. The Guidance Counselor may recommend students for a Mentorship Program in which staff members may take on the role of mentors, meeting with students on a weekly basis. Parents are sometimes unable to take off of work, or unable to afford to enroll their children in enrichment activities. Therefore, several extra-curricular activities take place, Monday through Friday both before and after school hours. In addition, we have included programs that would address the needs of specific students. Several students are slightly overweight or may be obese. These students are invited to participate in "Activity Days", a program which gives them an opportunity to engage in physical activities and learn about nutrition. In order to offset the cost of buying school supplies, at the beginning and towards the end of the school year, families donate and/or exchange gently used uniforms. This program saves our families a significant amount of money. 1  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools in which our school has made the most progress over the past year is Strong Family-Community Ties. Our Parent and Community Coordinators, in conjunction with our Administration and Teachers, have worked hard to create alliances and build trust between our families and our staff. The element of the Framework that will be our key area of focus for 2018-2019 is Rigorous Instruction. “We know that a person’s vocabulary is an area that will play a role in the worlds of college and career. We also know that it has a tremendous relationship with reading comprehension, especially as children move up the grades, and thus impacts knowledge-building in the various disciplines. Research related to vocabulary instruction and word knowledge shows that there is a strong correlation between knowing words and comprehending text” (Beck, McKeown, & Kucan, 2008). With more than half of our student population being English Language Learners or former ELLs it is paramount that vocabulary acquisition is our focus. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q307 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 934 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 76 76 34 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 11 34 34 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 94.4% % Reduced Lunch 38.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 95.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.25 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 32.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 93% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A YSH NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 88 88 34 96.2% 2.8% 22.4% 0.7% 2.2% 0.3% 4 11% 5.9 44.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The 2017-2018 Quality Review Report, 2017-2018 School Quality Guide; June Instructional Reports for 2018, and the NYSED Report Card (3-8 ELA and Math Assessment data) all identify several strengths in the Rigorous Instruction element of the Framework for Great Schools. Indicator 1.1 of the Quality Review is rated proficient; and states that the curricula used by Pioneer Academy teachers 'are aligned to the CCLS and integrate the instructional shifts with a focus on academic vocabulary and balancing literary and informational texts.' In addition, findings indicate that curricula and tasks are planned and refined, using student work and data. The impact of these practices, according to the Quality Review Report, is that students are more prepared for college and career readiness, and the work done by teachers on developing the curricula, give access to ELLs and students with disabilities; and ensure that students are cognitively engaged. The School Quality Guide indicates that 90% of teachers say that students feel challenged and 86% of teachers state that students have to work hard to do well. On New York State assessments, students have shown an increase in their academic performance in both the ELA and math, over the last three years (2016, 2017 & 2018). The percentage of students scoring at level 3 in math was higher than both the District and the State. 2. While 92% of teachers of all subjects say they had the resources to include opportunities for students to interact with academic language, analysis of the June Instructional Report reveals that, in general, students struggled with standards that involved word meaning in ELA or solving word problems in math. Therefore, we will continue to focus on addressing our students’ vocabulary acquisition needs (in alignment with the district focus for ELLs). “Research related to vocabulary instruction and word knowledge shows that there is a strong correlation between knowing words and comprehending text” (Beck, McKeown, & Kucan, 2008). Increased knowledge of vocabulary also helps prepare students for college and career readiness. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will see an 10% increase of students on grade level in the area of vocabulary, as measured by the BOY i-Ready diagnostic as compared to the EOY i-Ready diagnostic. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? DAC Protocol - Describe, Analyze & Consider All scholars 09/10/18 - 06/07/19 Grade team inquiry to reflect and inform curriculum planning as well as develop and implement an action plan that addresses vocabulary trends across the grade level data based on Unit assessments Professional Development around Vocabulary Acquisition - Teachers & Support Staff 10/02/18 - 06/07/19 Teachers, AIS Teachers, ENL Providers & Data Specialists Teachers, AIS Teachers, & ENL Providers Vocabulary for ELLs and SWDs Training on Pedagogical Structures that promote use of precise language and develop oral language. ELLs and SWDs 10/01/18 - 06/07/19 Classroom & ENL Teachers  Math (K-5)  ENL (K-5) Academic Intervention Support (AIS) Is provided to Grades K-5 in Reading. Grades 3-5 also receive AIS services in Mathematics. AIS push in to work with small groups of students. They meet with their groups 2-3 times a week and work closely with the classroom teacher to support these students and plan for instruction. Inter-visitation & Learning Walks All scholars/ mandated scholars 10/15/18 - 06/07/19 AIS Teachers & Classroom Teachers Teachers 10/08/18- 06/07/19 Administration, Coaches & Teachers Providing opportunities for teachers to observe and give feedback to their colleagues based on professional development that occurs on Mondays. This is in an effort to improve pedagogy and create a common language of culture. “Educators report that rounds work increases their acuity and sophistication around instructional issues and builds a strong set of collegial relationships with a common language and common 5 set of concerns” - Instructional Rounds in Education, City, Elmore, Fiarman, & Teitel, 2009 After School Phonics Program The Phonics After School program supports students language acquisition skills. This program has 3 stations that incorporate Vocabulary, Oral Language, and Phonics within the classroom so that each student rotates to a different station to receive instruction 10/15/18 - 06/20/19 Classroom Teachers At Risk students & Newcomer ELLs 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent Workshops hosted by AIS, ENL Department, Parent Coordinator and the Guidance Office to provide families with clear academic expectations and strategies to support their students at home Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. i-Pads and Chrome Books will be used to administer the assessment tool; monies will be allocated for professional development of staff offered by organizations, such as Bureau of Education Research and Queens North PDs. The math consultant will make bi-monthly visits to facilitate workshops for both ELA and math teachers in K-5 on Pedagogical Structures and Intervisitations amongst grade teams. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will see an average increase of 5% of students on grade level in the area of vocabulary, as measured by the BOY i-Ready diagnostic as compared to the MOY i-Ready diagnostic MOY i-Ready. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Mid-Year Benchmark Assessments: i-Ready Reading Diagnostic Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. Indicators 1.4. (maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults) and 3.4 (establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations) were rated at 'proficient', as per the 2017-2018 NYC School Quality Guide. The NYSED School Report Card 2018 indicates that girls increased their performance on both the ELA and math test by 10 percentage points; and boys' performance increased on ELA and math by 4% and 7% respectively. Students in the general education setting scored 10% higher in 2018 than in 2017 in ELA; and 12% higher in math. 2. The 2017-2018 Quality Review Report shows that the academic achievement in Students with Disabilities dropped by 1% and 4% in ELA and math, respectively.The Framework Element Scores for Supportive Environment on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide dropped from 3.77 in 2017 to 3.49 in 2018. The Survey Element Scores also decreased from 3.41 to 3.28, for the same period. When compared to the District and the City, the Social Emotional indicator for Pioneer Academy was 8% and 9% lower, respectively. According to Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs, if students are not emotionally stable they are not accessible for learning. If basic needs are not met, then additional information cannot be stored. Research shows social emotional deficits negatively affect attendance, participation, and overall academic performance. Due to the ever changing cultural and social-emotional needs of our students we feel this is an area that needs urgent attention. We as a school community must work together to ensure our students feel safe, supported and challenged by teachers and peers. 3. Scholars are greeted at the door, as they enter the school each morning. At the beginning of the school year, each class creates a “Contract of Expectations.” These expectations are reinforced throughout the year. Teachers continue to build on classroom community throughout the year by holding Town Hall meetings. These are restorative and informal meetings, conducted after lunch, where the classroom teacher and scholars can discuss issues that affect the classroom or school community. Town Hall meetings foster diverse opinions, authentic communication, mutual understanding, and transparency among scholars and staff. Our staff mentor program was created to support “at-risk” scholars' to promote their social/emotional well-being. Staff members “adopt and mentor a scholar” with whom they have a special connection with; or are matched with a ‘best fit’. These scholars whom are mentored experience various hardships that may leave them vulnerable and at-risk for not performing to their potential. Some of these scholars are living in temporary housing, or may have an incarcerated or deceased parent. With written parental consent, staff members take scholars to lunch, play games, celebrate milestones, or provide other social, emotional non-academic support. While academic support is provided at the scholars' request, the goal is to ensure the scholars feels nurtured, and valued, in spite of the challenges they may experience. Our school counselor provides weekly guidance lessons to scholars (K-5) based on the guidance curriculum. These include executive functioning for 3rd grade; and College and Career Readiness and puberty lessons for 5th grade 7  scholars. To support 5th grade scholars and their families in selecting the “best fit” middle school, family workshops are held from September through December to provide more detailed support in completing Middle School applications. After-school enrichment programs are available for scholars, such as chess, Mighty Milers, Girls Inc., ENL, Phonics Program,etc. In school activities include the Leadership Program, HERstory, Boys to MENtors, and Global Classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of teachers will say that the adults at their school help students develop the skills they need to complete challenging coursework, despite obstacles. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development for All School Staff All Teachers 11/19/2018 Erin Dunlevy PDs facilitated by Erin Dunlevy from the Office of Equity and Access Division of School Climate and Wellness around Culturally Relevant Teaching funded by the CREATES $29,000 grant PD Series from the Coaching for Equity from the Department of Teaching and Learning Pioneer Academy Equity Team engages in monthly meetings, from December through June, to participate in a book study with Zaretta Hammond’s Culturally Responsive Teaching and the Brain: Promoting Authentic Engagement and Rigor Among Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Students. The Equity Team will turnkey the findings from their reading of Zaretta Hammond’s book and facilitate monthly PDs, beginning in January 2019. Professional Development for All School Staff All Staff Suicide Prevention Training Identifying Kids in Crisis    Morning Routines - Daily Check In AIT - Academic Intervention Team Special Education Teachers Speech Therapist  Guidance Counselor    Occupational Therapist  Physical Therapist - 06/17/2019 Equity Team 09/10/18 - 06/21/19 Guidance/ Administration/ Related Services 10/30/18- 06/26/19 At Risk Scholars & Scholars with Disabilities AIT / Administration/ Guidance/ Related Services Pioneer Academy Staff-Mentor Program for At Risk Scholars At Risk Scholars 10/01/18- 06/26/19 Grade-wide Guidance Advisory Assemblies exposes scholars to situational and hands on lessons and activities to broaden their All Scholars 09/17/18 - 06/26/19 Volunteer Staff/ Administration/ Guidance Guidance 9 understanding of their emotional spectrum and social responsibility. Attendance Tracking All scholars 09/10/18 - 06/28/19 Family -Teacher Support Group provides strategies on how parents can best support their scholars in all areas of development (academic, social-emotional, behavior and physical development). At risk scholars & Scholars with Disabilities 09/13/18 - 06/28/19 Guidance/ Administration/ Teachers Guidance/ Parent Coordinator/ Related Services/ Classroom Teachers Attendance and social emotional support for students with prolonged absence due to traveling. Our students who have strong family ties outside of the United States typically have poor attendance during certain months of the year. We would like to provide these families with additional support to lessen the impact of these absences and encourage families to forego their travel plans until the completion of the entire school year. The inconsistency of attendance creates academic gaps and can lead to social emotional issues for these students. Cloud 9 World - Social Emotional Program Cloud9World is a unique social and emotional learning program that integrates literacy as the vehicle for teaching character strengths. Work with School Wellness Council and/or SLT to plan wellness-related activities that improve attendance and student and family empowerment 09/14/18- 06/23/19 Guidance Office/ Parent Coordinator Students with prolonged absence due to traveling All students 09/24/18- 06/26/19 All Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent Workshops hosted by Parent Coordinator and the Guidance Office to provide families with information and strategies to support their students at home. For example: Nutrition and Health, Emergency Preparedness, and Understanding the IEP Process. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will be reaching out for resources and support via community-based organizations (ie. Catholic Charities, Cornell Cooperative Extension, Health Plus and Empire Blue Cross Blue Shield). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 0  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  There will be a 1% decrease of entries in the Guidance Counselor's log of assistance for non-mandated students, by February 2019, as compared to the entries made by November 30, 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Guidance Counselor's log of assistance for non-mandated students Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on feedback from our Superintendent’s visit, observations of teacher practice and feedback, teacher surveys, monitoring scholar outcomes as per teacher formative and summative assessments, benchmark assessments, and local and state measures our teachers’ instruction would benefit from additional professional development around Danielson 3b: Questioning and Discussion: “a highly effective teacher uses a variety or series of questions or prompts to challenge students cognitively, advance higher-level thinking and discourse, and promote meta-cognition. Students formulate many questions, initiate topics, challenge one another’s thinking, and make unsolicited contributions. Students themselves ensure that all voices are heard in the discussion.” We will continue to focus on teachers' questioning techniques to ensure that student discourse is challenging, and students are able to answer and construct higher order questions independently and to foster student engagement and autonomy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of teachers will maintain a Highly Effective rating or increase their rating from Ineffective or Developing to Effective or Highly Effective, in component 3b (Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques Inventory) of the Danielson Framework, as measured by their ratings on observations in Advance. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development around how to best engage and promote oral language scholars by using questioning and discussion. Teacher Rounds - Inter-visitation Implementation of Pedagogical Structures SOLOM (Student Oral Language Observation Matrix) Implementation of SOLOM rubric for promoting scholar language. The SOLOM is a rating scale that teachers can use to assess their students' command of oral language on the basis of what they observe on a continual basis in a variety of situations - class discussions, playground interactions, encounters between classes. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers & Support Staff 10/01/18- 6/14/19 Teachers & Support Staff 10/08/18- 6/14/19 Teachers 09/05/18- 6/14/19 Teachers, Consultants & Administration Teachers, Consultants & Administration Teachers, Consultants & Administration Scholars - ELLs 09/10/18- 6/14/19 Teachers, Coaches, ENL, Consultants & Administration Core Knowledge Language Arts & Expeditionary Learning Curricula Scholars 10/01/18- 6/26/19 Both place high emphasis on scholars asking and answering higher order thinking questions of all types - literal, inferential and evaluative. Teachers, Coaches, ENL Department, Consultants & Administration Workshop for Families on promoting questioning & discussion, as per the Danielson Framework Families 09/13/18- 06/13/19 FTA, Administration, Parent Coordinator Debate Team Students who participate in this extracurricular activity learn how to think critically; and construct and support arguments, based on their position. 4th & 5th Grade students 10/29/18 - 06/14/19 Classroom Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 3  Monthly Parent Workshops hosted by Parent Coordinator and the Guidance Office to provide families with information and strategies to support their students at home. In addition, our classroom teachers host weekly Parent Engagement workshops each Tuesday morning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds will be used to support coaches and consultants who will facilitate workshops and provide instructional support to improve teacher questioning and scholar discourse. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded X X Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 50% of teachers who received a rating of Ineffective or Developing in component 3b (Questioning and Discussion Techniques) in Fall 2018 will receive an Effective or Highly Effective rating in 3b, as measured by their observations in Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Ratings on Observations in Advance on 3b - Questioning and Discussion Techniques Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The 2017-2018 Quality Review Report indicates that written feedback 'captures teachers' strengths, challenges and next steps using the Danielson Framework of Teaching. An effective system drives the use of teacher observation data in the design and facilitation of professional development, as well as informed decisions as to teacher assignments.' The 2017-2018 School Quality Guide indicates that 76% of teachers say that the principal sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development 2. We are working to streamline communication and provide a transparent way for all staff members to have a voice in major staffing decisions. Based on our school survey of teachers we want to increase the number of teachers who feel they have moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in the area of hiring new personnel. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will see a 3% increase in teachers who reported that they have a moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in the area of hiring new professional personnel, based on the results of the 2019 school survey. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Hiring Committee Teachers 09/17/18- 6/21/19 Hiring Committee & Admin The hiring teams strategically seeks a diverse pool of teacher candidates to reflect the world at large. The hiring team consists of administrators, teachers and specialists School Leadership Team (SLT) The SLT Coaches support effective lesson planning: Teachers 09/10/18- 6/14/19 Coaches & Administration Teachers 09/10/18- 6/14/19 Coaches & Administration  Differentiation  Questioning  Misconceptions  Learning Activities Coaches guide teachers when using data to drive instruction: Teachers 09/10/18- 6/14/19 Coaches & Administration  DAC Protocol  Inquiry Cycles - Tuning Protocol Coaches provide support with effective classroom management: Teachers 09/10/18- 6/14/19 Coaches, & Administration Strategies and Interventions   Professional Development   Morning Check In - Social Emotional Well Being Inter-visitation 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 6  The AIS Team (Grades K-5) will support families in this area by hosting monthly workshops on ways to help scholars academically and socially; and on resources at school and in the community that can be utilized. Parents also receive support from the technology teacher, Guidance Counselor, ENL providers and Related Services Providers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will be using our Tax Levy and Title I SWP funds to support our coaching initiative for the upcoming school year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, we will see a 1% increase in teachers who reported that they have a moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in the area of hiring new professional personnel, as measured by the results of a survey administered to teachers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  School Culture Survey, MOY Survey focusing on teachers influence over hiring new professional personnel Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Successful family literacy programs promote parent-child interaction with many types of literacy events (Wasik, 2004). Involving families as an integral part of literacy instruction is crucial. Letting families know how they can help to support the school program at home is important, but home–school programs need to be easy to use. In a meta-analysis of 20 interventions involving 1,583 families (Sénéchal, 2003), results clearly showed that family involvement had a positive effect on children’s reading acquisition. The most effective form of family involvement, producing the best results, was training families to use a specific reading strategy that their children were working on in school (Darling & Westberg, 2004). Teachers, other school personnel, and families must communicate and collaborate with one another to contribute to children’s literacy growth. This is particularly important in schools with diverse populations (Casanova, 1987; Chavkin & Gonzalez, 1995). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our June 2018 Coaching Families Post Survey showed 45% of families are confident or very confident in helping to support their scholars' performance in reading and writing. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in families who state that they are confident helping to support their scholars' performance in reading and writing, as measured by Coaching Families Post-Survey. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Family Book Club Families 10/15/18- 6/14/19 Parent Coordinator, ENL Department, Guidance & Staff Volunteers Families 10/15/18- 6/14/19 Parent Coordinator, ENL Department, Classroom Teachers, Speech Therapists & Coaches Our Family Book Club is led by our Parent Coordinator. The focus of the program is to help our families engage in a literacy program where they are able to be supported through the process of reading a novel and provide opportunities for meaningful book talk. Additionally, they are able to see a model for ways in which they can talk to their scholars about the books they are reading. This gives our families a chance to be part of a community of readers. Monthly Family Workshops Coaches from each grade work with families to cover the following information: o ELA & Math Strategies (K-5) o Preparing for NYS Exams (3-5) o Module/Unit Overviews (K-5) o Grade wide expectations (K-5) ENL Department supports our English Language Learner Families to cover the following information: o What to expect on the NYSESLAT o Reading, Vocabulary & Writing Strategies for ELLs Related Service Providers work with our families to offer information and strategies to better support their scholar(s) at home: o Occupational Therapists 9  o Speech Therapists o Physical Therapists o Guidance Counselor Monthly Family Community Tour Field Trips Families 10/15/18- 6/14/19 Parent Coordinator & Learning Leaders Families are invited to experience the trips their scholars are attending. These family trips allow parents to have first hand experiences of what their scholars are learning. Families can have a deeper understanding and connection to their scholars' experiences on these trips and promote discussion and dialogue about what they are learning and why. As many of our families are themselves English Language Learners these trips are coordinated and led by our Parent Coordinator. The Parent Coordinator is able to translate and connect families to all the additional resources available to them from our various community partnerships. Examples include: Partnership with NYC Public Library How to navigate and take advantage of different programs within the public library.  Provide scholars and families with library cards.  Homework Help  ESL program within the library  Guest speakers Partnership with Hall of Science  Offers workshops during school breaks   Family workshops are free for our scholars Free membership for the museum Museo Del Barrio  Connecting literacy, the Arts and Culture 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our Parent and Community Coordinators work closely with our FTA to ensure our families are up to date with what is happening within our school community by utilizing our social media platform, text message blasts and events board at the entrance of our school building. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 0  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds will be allocated to support the Parent Coordinator’s continued collaboration with classroom teachers and other organizations in facilitating workshops for families. Families will be surveyed in the September and workshops will be organized based on survey data. Families will also be assessed in January and again in June 2019 to measure viability of the programs/workshops provided. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase in families who state that they are confident helping to support their scholars' performance in reading and writing, as measured by the Coaching Families Mid-Year Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Survey of Families Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Grade 4-5 NYS ELAScores Grade K-3 – Bottom 10% performance on benchmark assessments (i.e. i-Ready Diagnostic) Mathematics Grade 4-5 NYS Math Scores Grade K-3 – Bottom 10% performance on benchmark assessments (i.e. i-Ready Diagnostic) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) AIS is provided to scholars during, RtI daily; 50 minutes in small group instruction during the school day. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) The Academic Intervention Teachers service scholars using small group instruction usually 4-6 scholars in a group. Scholars are engaged in the reading comprehension and the writing process every day. Their progress is monitored on a regular basis. In groups of 4-6 scholars, the teacher differentiated and modifies the math content, process and product to provide access to scholars. AIS is also provided to scholars during, RtI daily; 50 minutes on small group instruction during the school day. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) AIS teachers provide pull out services and push in services using the Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention Program and the New York Coach book series. This program is used to support our scholars who have been targeted to receive academic intervention in English Language Arts and is designed for Tier 3 scholars in literacy. The goal of the intervention is to bring scholars to grade level achievement. The MathCoach, AISand SETSS teachers provide pull out and push in services through small group instruction designed to provide remediation usingTheNew York Coach book series. 2  Science 4 th Grade Scholars who are performing at a Tier 3 level on the mock NYS Science Exam. Social Studies Grade 4-5 NYS ELA Scores Grades 2&3 – Bottom 10% performance on benchmark assessments (i.e. i-Ready Diagnostic) At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Scholars who are recommended by AIT (Academic Intervention Team). The team consists of: Guidance Counselor Special Education Teachers Speech Therapist Occupational Therapist Physical Therapist The Science Specialists provide science enrichment to all 4th grade scholars before and after school. Scholars are exposed to inquiry based instruction. They work in small interest based teams. The Social Studies specialist provides social studies enrichment. Scholars will be exposed to inquiry based instruction. They work in small interest based teams. Scholars experiencing academic difficulty combined with social emotional, behavioral challenges are identified by the school guidance counselor. These scholars can be added to our "at-risk" mentoring program and families can be invited to join a family-teacher support group lead by our Guidance Counselor. 4th Grade Scholars AISis also provided to scholars during,RtIdaily; 50 minutes on small group instruction during the school day. Scholars in grades 2-5 During the school day During the school day The Guidance Counselor provides scholars with small group sessions where they are able to discuss and work through issues relating to home and school. The guidance counselor also provides the classroom teachers with strategies on how to address these scholars’ needs in the classroom as well as provide support during lunch. 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have seventy-four children in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. There are about 84 children who are classified as "Students in Temporary Housing." These students receive specific services to address their needs, including monthly check-ins by the Guidance Counselor (with the support of the Parent and Community Coordinators). Research shows that homelessness correlates with a drop in the rate of student achievement. Therefore, monthly check-ins are crucial in ensuring that students living in temporary housing do not want for basic necessities. Students are provided with clothing, care packages, food, and even handmade gifts during holidays. They are also provided with supplies for school, like book bags and uniforms. Staff at Pioneer Academy communicate frequently with case workers and with ACS. They also provide these offices with updates on each students' status. Communication with teachers is also done regularly to offset the possible negative impact students may suffer as a result of living in temporary housing. In addition, families are supported with assistance in completing all required paperwork. Our Guidance Counselor supports our families by offering counseling services and our Parent Coordinator provides these scholars and their families with school and community resources. Title 1 funds are allocated to support these scholars with:  The purchase of emergency supplies   Educational experiences, such as class field trips, that link to the curriculum Fund academic after school programs for those identified as included in the STH population Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The following strategies will be used to attract Highly Qualified Teachers or to ensure that current staff becomes highly qualified, in order to achieve this goal: Inter-visitations and demonstration lessons  Committee-based hiring-made up of families, teachers, scholars  Weekly participation in grade level team meetings   On-Site and Off-Site Professional Development Workshops (i.e. SIOP, RtI, Co-Teaching Strategies...)  Peer mentoring Learning Walks   Teacher facilitated workshops   Consistent professional development support in literacy will be provided for all classroom teachers; teachers Support from math and writing consultants meet regularly to revise and refine unit plans that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards; analyze student work; and create differentiated groups to meet determined needs/goals  Provide on-going feedback to teachers in one-on-one meetings, formal and informal observations  Create schedule to allow for common planning time  Purchase Cool Culture family pass for free admissions to museums and parks to create authentic experiences  Create a schedule that allows for staff to focus on vertical alignment of instruction  ENL Department provides workshops on effective ENL strategies for teachers and Co-Teaching with ENL Teachers 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We offer ongoing professional development to increase teachers' skills in skills in methodologies to improve scholar behavior and sound pedagogical techniques in teaching students with disabilities and our ENL scholar population. Our professional development will be based upon data-driven scholar needs and geared towards sound research validated practices. All Professional Development will be matched to curriculum content and aligned with Common Core Learning Standards. Our school retains and develops highly qualified teachers by guiding their work through 6  collaboration with the teachers on their grade, Professional Development and assistance from colleagues and administration. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● First 15 Days – Kindergarten launch focused on smoothly rolling out classroom routines and expectations ● First day classroom parent visit ● Summer & Fall Parent Workshops: o Transitioning to Elementary School o Help your child begin to read o Develop your child’s early math skills o Understanding the Common Core o Kindergarten Routines & Expectations ● Kindergarten teachers reference the New York State Pre-kindergarten Foundation for the Common Core when planning initially to ensure all prerequisite skills have been met prior ● ENL Screening & Registration to gather additional education information and history 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 7  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The vast majority of the school uses common assessments across grades in ELA, math and science. The pre, mid and post assessments come directly from Core Knowledge and Expeditionary Learning for ELA and Math. These assessments measure concepts and skills aligned to the CCLS to evaluate scholar progress. Science assessments are generated from National Geographic and Foss resources which are aligned to the National Science Education Standards and the NYC K-8 Science Scope and Sequence. Assessments are also aligned to curricula for each unit of study. Assessments are informed by scholar progress and are used to monitor and adjust instructional practices accordingly. Teacher teams meet weekly during their common preparation periods to discuss the content and pacing of the curriculum as it relates to the needs of their scholars. Grade teams determine their focus based upon multiple data sources (student work samples, aggregated spreadsheets, unit assessments). The Data Team supports teachers with the collection and analysis of data and shares it school-wide on Google spreadsheets for collaborative use. The assessment data is collected and maintained in the PADD (Pioneer Academy Data Drive). This data is used during Professional Development and during Team Meetings to inform their instructional decisions. Classroom teachers meet in grade teams, along with AIS and ENL Providers in order to analyze, norm and score BoY and EoY. Training was provided for teachers by administration, the data team or AIS Providers. Teachers are provided spreadsheets with the data, which they analyze and decide on as a team, the strategies that will be implemented over the course of a specified number of weeks. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal $589,428 0 $46,670 0 X 0 X 0 Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A Part 3 - Action Plan N/A Section 5 Part3- Action Plan N/A 8  Tax Levy (FSF) Local $6,967,632 X Section 5 Part3and 4B - Action Plan 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 9   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Pioneer Academy, PS 307, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Pioneer Academy PS 307 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 1  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESEA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESEA; 2  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Pioneer Academy PS 307, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments., I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 3  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 4  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 5  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm 2. 3. Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: Pioneer Academy This school is (check one): DBN: 24Q307 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Upon analysis of available NYSESLAT data for scholars in grades 2-5, and ongoing informal and formal assessments, the data revealed that ELL scholars need to further develop their language skills across the four language modalities: listening, speaking, reading and writing. Based on our EDAT for Spring 2016, the highest concentration of ELLs falls within the Expanding proficiency level. Of our current ELLs 50% are at an Expanding proficiency level. This provides us with the opportunity to move half of our students to Commanding/ Proficient this year. Across grade levels, most Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding students scored in the mid range on three modalities of the NYSESLAT (Listening, Reading and Writing). Sixty-nine percent of Expanding students scored in the high range on the Speaking modality. This data demonstrates that the scholars have attained much success in developing BICS (Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills) and would strongly benefit from developing CALP (Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency) across the content areas. ELA After School - This program is a cross-content literacy program for third grade ELLs reading far below grade level. The After School program will run 28 weeks. It will start on November 15, 2017 and will end on June 13, 2018. Instruction will take place on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. After analyzing ELA and Math State scores, the findings revealed that ELL scholars would benefit from additional opportunities to utilize content area vocabulary and language to explain their thinking orally and in writing. In addition, ELL scholars would benefit from supplemental opportunities to use information gathered from hands on activities to further expand their academic language including actively listening for alternative interpretations and ideas. In response to these observations, the after school ELA and Math program was designed to address ELL scholar needs in these areas. At the conclusion of the ELA, Math, and Science Units the students will celebrate their hard work culminating in a field trip to various community cultural institutions. ENL 4th Grade Afterschool Program- ENL 4th grade scholars (39 scholars in all) who are considered “at risk” were selected to attend an after school reading and writing program from March 28, 2018 to May 18, 2018. This program targeted reading and writing skills that are assessed on the annual NYSESLAT. The program was Tuesday, Wednesday & Thursday from 2:30 - 4:00PM. Saturday Academy - The program will start on December 3, 2017 from 8:30 a.m. to 12:30 pm and run until April 28, 2018. Saturday Academy gives scholars extra preparation for all state assessments. Teachers provide instruction in reading, writing, math to support ELLs in a small instructional setting. Phonics Newcomer Program - We have designed an after school program geared toward students with Entering Level Language Proficiency throughout grades K - 5. This program includes concentrated phonics, vocabulary and oral language instruction using Sadlier instructional materials. Scholars are exposed to intensive vocabulary instruction using content 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information based picture cards and prompts which help build cross-content vocabulary and develop their oral language skills in English. Eight teachers and 8 paraprofessionals delivering instruction and this program is scheduled for Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays (2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m) . Newcomer/Immigrant Program - This program will target both new immigrant families who have recently moved to New York City and are new immigrant scholars. The program will support families in transitioning to a new country, new city and a new school. It will provide mentoring services from our Guidance Counselor and support from our Parent Coordinator while providing new life experiences to our immigrant scholars and their families. Scholar and parent will create a scrapbook with places they explored in New York City. Scholar and parent will be taken to a monthly trip starting in February. Parents or family members will share the experience of exploring landmarks and institutions in New York City. The goal is to create experiences for scholars and their families by visiting museums, and different landmarks in and around New York City. Some scheduled trips include: The World Trade Center Museum, Off Broadway Plays, The Statue of Liberty and the Museum of Natural History. Many of these places will be tied to the curriculum that the new immigrant scholars will be engaged in throughout the school year. This program will work in conjunction with the New Comer Phonics after school program. ELL Science Program - Fourth grade scholars will participate in a science after school program that meets each week after school on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. The program will begin on February 3, 2018. The program will target at least 75 ELL scholars and transitional ELLs with mixed English language proficiencies from entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding levels through an inquiry based approach. An ENL teacher will work collaboratively with a science specialist to plan and deliver instruction. The ENL teacher provides best practices in ENL methodologies as well as native language support. Both the science content teachers and the ENL teachers will work collaboratively to create hands on activities for scholars to actively interact with science content and vocabulary through the scientific process. One goal of this program is to deepen scholars' understanding of K-4 science concepts and promote acquisition of content vocabulary and concepts. Scholars are encouraged to use content vocabulary and scientific tools during exploration activities in the following areas: plant and animal adaptations, force and motion, the importance of the sun and life on earth, weather changes, and energy. Some of these exploration materials include magnifying glasses, scales, weights, magnets and measuring cups. An important goal of the science after school program is to develop English language skills across all four modalities, as well as review concepts in preparation for the 4th grade New York Science Performance Exam. In order for scholars to prepare for the exam, we will be using the Kaplan test sophistication books.Museo del Barrio Partnership -"Making Connections". This is a program offered after school through Councilwoman, Julissa Ferreras, and entitled "Creative After School Adventures (CASA)"). This is a partnership between Pioneer Academy and El Museo del Barrio in the hopes of fostering an academic-artistic relationship. This program is offered this program to approximately 25 Second Grade English Language Learners once a week on Tuesdays for 12 weeks beginning on February 13, 2018. Each session will be held for two hours with guided instruction from our ENL team and teaching artists from El Museo del Barrio. These teacher teams will provide students with a unique structural academic and art experience. The final product of this will be an exhibition of the development of this artistic project at El Museo del Barrio that will be displayed for one year. Fast ForWord by Scientific Learning/ i-Ready by Curriculum Associates, LLC - These are computer based diagnostic programs that measures foundational skills in reading and math. The students take a diagnostic test three times in the school year: a beginning. middle and end of year assessment. The diagnostic results are then used to drive instruction. Fast ForWord is a language development program that builds cognitive and language skills simultaneously. Scholars use Fast ForWord three times a week for 45 minutes per session. 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: In order to enhance ELL instruction and planning, ENL teachers will attend one full day workshop held on Monday, September 18, 2017 from 8:30 a.m.-2:30 p.m. that will focus on using assessment results to improve instructional outcomes facilitated by the the Assessment Team. On September 27, 2017, ENL teachers will also attend another full day PD from 8:30 a.m. - 2:30 p.m. facilitated by a designated coach from our school, which will focus on Co-Teaching Models for K-5 English Language Learners. Different forms of these Co- Teaching models discussed in the professional development will be utilized during instruction with ELL scholars. The ENL certified teachers will turnkey the above information, during a series of professional development workshops entitled: Including ELL Strategies and Best Practices into Your Instructional Practice, Effective Co-Teaching Models for ELLs, and An Overview of NYSESLAT K-5. These professional development sessions will be held on Monday, October 23 and 30, 2017. The third professional development will take place on Monday, November 6, 2017. As part of building collaborative instructional planning, the ENL and classroom teachers meet weekly to discuss individual ELL scholars and plan accordingly to differentiate instruction based on scholar academic and language proficiency needs at no cost to Title III. English as a New Language teachers and content area teachers attend numerous professional development sessions during the year provided by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support around Co-Teaching for ELLs. In addition, ENL staff and classroom teachers meet eight times a year for data analysis during morning planning time, preparation periods, and during grade specific common planning time. The out-of-classroom ENL teachers provide additional support, materials, scaffolding techniques and ENL methodologies that support staff in delivering quality instruction to English Language Learners. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Family engagement is fundamental in order for ELLs to achieve proficiency in the English language and for parents to assist their children in attaining academic success. With this in rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities 0  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities mind, the ENL Department and Parent Coordinator has organized a series of Parent Workshops for families to support their child's education. The workshops will concentrate on different topics based on a survey taken by the parents during the Parent Orientation. The workshops will be presented by the ENL Teachers, and they will also serve as translators as needed. In addition, the Parent Coordinator will assist with providing parents with the information of the upcoming workshops by sending out flyers, and newsletters. Workshops will be held by ENL Department on Tuesday mornings at 7:30 a.m. during Family Engagement time. They are as follows: · · · · · · · · Fourth Grade families of ELLs taking the NYS Science Exam will be invited to a monthly workshop series provided by the Parent Coordinator and science teacher beginning in November 2017. The purpose of this workshop series is to assist families in becoming familiar with the format and content of the New York State Science Exam. Families will be provided with strategies to assist their children at home with inquiry based science concepts and projects. All communication with families will be available in the parent’s choice of either in English or in their native language. Reading with your Child, October 10, 2017 All About the NYSESLAT on November 14, 2017 Vocabulary and Phonics on December 19, 2017 ELA Expectations on January 16, 2018 Writer's Workshop on February 13, 2018 NYSESLAT: All Modalities on March 13, 2018 Expectations for School Year 2018 - 2019 on April 24, 2018 Summer Slide: Summer Reading Program on May 22, 2018 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, 3. 1  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name Pioneer Academy, PS 307 Borough Queens School Number 307 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Cecilia Jackson Assistant Principal Rudelina Murray Coach Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Christina Armas Teacher/Subject Area Eileen Edwards/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider School Counselor Giselle Uzhca Parent Ana Lucero Parent Coordinator Xirey Rivas Field Support Center Staff Member Superintendent Madeline Chan Other (Name and Title) Marina Eichner Compliance/Data C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 7 6 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] N/A Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 1 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program N/A Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 933 3 Total number of ELLs 363 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 38.91%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 4 0 3 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? For the academic year 2017-2018, Pioneer Academy has begun using the Teachers College (TC) Writing - Units of Study. This program includes a writing baseline, for grades K through 5, which teachers use to analyze scholars’ writing skills. Pioneer Academy also administers the Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessment in fall, winter, and spring to observe and record specific reading behaviors and proficiency in reading comprehension. This assessment identifies scholars’ independent and instructional reading levels, which teachers then use to form their guided reading groups and improve reading behaviors by teaching lessons in phonics, phonological awareness, fluency, vocabulary and comprehension. In these lessons, teachers develop scholars’ understanding of books on a literal and inferential level; scholars are also taught how to analyze and evaluate texts. The iReady diagnostics assessment is administered to all scholars in grades K through 5, in both Reading and Math. The reading assessment measures an individual’s performance level in the areas of phonological awareness, phonics, high-frequency words, vocabulary and comprehension both in informational and literary texts. At-risk and newcomer ELLs are 4  given our in-house inventory which consists of alphabet recognition, letter sounds, concepts of print and high-frequency words. The math assessment measures an individual’s perfomance level in the areas of number and operations, algebra and algebraic thinking, measurement and data; and geometry. All scholars, particularly ELLs, are taught strategies to support their understanding of word problems. The i-Ready program includes the strengths and challenges of each scholar, along with recommended tools for instruction. An instructional grouping profile of scholars who are at similar performance levels for each component is listed. Progress of ELLs is monitored by reports on individual scholars, their classes and grades. The data from iReady reflects the increased percentage of ELLs performing on grade level in reading and math. These data insights will give us a concise perspective on how to approach a scholar’s educational needs by providing the adequate amount of support and scaffolds needed for academic achievement. . 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our school collects both formative and summative data from our scholars to enhance teachers instructional planning. Our summative data informs our school how to better plan for ELL instruction through a variety of ways. We administer tests; and scholars complete projects and portfolio pieces that reflect their understanding of the concepts taught within the curriculum. The classroom teachers and ENL providers use these assessment pieces to evaluate and assess scholars’ mastery of skills and content. This information is also utilized for planning purposes with regards to better drive instruction for student achievement. Pioneer Academy uses formative assessments to analyze student work and their understanding of the material being taught. These assessments are also utilized to drive instruction and help with teacher planning for ELLs. Some examples of the formative assessments include exit tickets being used at the end of a lesson, think-pair-share conversations among scholars, and strategic scaffolded questioning to promote higher order thinking. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Pioneer Academy uses the NYSESLAT scores to evaluate our ELLs’ progress along the proficiency continuum. We use these results to help inform instruction, which is aligned to the New York State Learning Standards. Understanding the NYSESLAT scores helps administration and educators to determine how to drive instruction aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards, resulting in higher student achievement. The EDAT provides teachers with targeted data based on modality and correlates to NYS ELA and Math exams. Teacher’s College writing program, Units of Study, is used as a baseline to measure writing proficiency in grades K through 5. This program also includes End of Unit writing assessments, as well as formative writing assessments. The Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessment is used to inform teachers and providers of a scholar’s reading proficiency and understanding. The i-Ready diagnostics are administered in both reading and math, which automatically places scholars into instructional groups customized to their placement needs. Online lessons will be assigned by teachers on IXL to provide a consistent lesson structure that helps to build scholars’ conceptual and authentic understanding of the material. With regards to i-Ready reading, administrators and educators use the data to facilitate instruction in meeting the needs of our population. The areas of need include, but are not limited to, vocabulary, reading fluency and comprehension, parts of speech, and sentence structure in writing. Our school uses the results from the assessments mentioned above to tailor instruction in both reading, writing and vocabulary in order to meet the needs of our population. The school also uses the ELL Periodic Assessments to assess all ELL scholars mid year. Each modality is assessed, and the results are analyzed, to help drive instruction for the remainder of the year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Each team in our school conducts inquiry sessions around scholar data and work. We use Describe Analyze and Consider (DAC) protocol when looking at scholar data. This team inquiry looks at subgroups, classes, grades and school wide data to identify trends and better inform instructional goals and practices. Strengths and challenges are identified; and specific strategies are discussed and implemented within a four- to six-week period. We also use the Tuning Protocol. This is a time for teachers to meet with colleagues and present student work samples to help address a specific challenge the teacher is facing in the classroom with either a skill or concept they are teaching. This type of inquiry provides immediate collaborative feedback and offers strategies to address the issues that are involved with a specific scholar they might have in their class. 5  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school has Academic Intervention Services (AIS) providers assigned to every grade from K through 5. In grades 3 through 5, our departmentalized grades, we have two AIS providers each of whom support Math or ELA classroom teachers to further assist our scholars with understanding the curriculum and meeting their academic goals. As a Google Suite school, we collaborate collectively via Google Drive, so that the current scholar data is accessible to everyone who works with our scholars. Our AIS providers, therefore, use this data to help tailor their instruction to meet the needs of their scholars with whom they work. Some examples of AIS instruction would be a small group Guided Reading lesson, which correlates with scholars’ reading level and abilities. The AIS provider delivers a targeted lesson objective and follows through with sequencing the steps needed to achieve that reading strategy outcome. The provider would individually assess each scholar during the conferencing and make notes on how the scholar is grasping the concept. The providers analyze their assessments in order to better plan the next steps needed for each scholar, using the DAC protocol. Our providers in K begin with a focus on letter and sound recognition as well as concepts of print. They build up towards forming a small group Guided Reading lesson once the basic skills have been mastered. Our Math providers looks at teacher data in order to pull a small group. Their lessons depend on individual scholar needs, and are informed by the DAC protocol to see where each scholar is struggling the most. The provider would then plan lessons to best meet the needs of those scholars by implementing ELL and special education scaffolds and using effective differentiation. Another way in which the AIS providers gather data to guide instruction would be to provide Guided Math lessons based upon data gathered from exit slips and pre and post module Math assessments. AIS providers would then discuss trends noticed across the classroom and with particular students during grade and individual teacher meetings. That information would be used to provide next steps for instruction. For example, if the classroom data shows that a few scholars are struggling with skip counting by 2; the AIS provider would use that information to provide lessons for scholars that are struggling with that concept. The AIS provider would re-teach the same content by using a different approach, strategy, and/or manipulatives, but the language and vocabulary would remain consistent between the classroom teacher and the interventionist. Our school’s Drive is collectively used to share data and collaborate, and data analysis often takes places during teacher to teacher meetings. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT is used to evaluate and inform our ELL program by providing us with information about a scholar’s English language proficiency. It measures a scholar’s growth toward proficiency in acquiring the English language. It gives us information regarding entitlement of services, continuation of services, or non-entitlement. We use this information to correctly schedule the correct number of minutes and content area of program for each scholar being serviced for English as a New Language. The EDAT provides us with a breakdown of data (based on modality), from the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT. This data identifies where a scholar’s strengths lie and what impeded them from reaching a Commanding score in order to be considered English proficient. The NYS ELA and Math assessments (grades 3 through 5) help to inform our ELL program by giving our educators information regarding performance level descriptors. These PLD’s describe what specific content knowledge and skills scholars need to know in order to perform well at each performance level on the state test. The information provides a snapshot of scholars’ academic characteristics based on the performance tasks. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our school administers the ELL Periodic Assessment (Grades 3-5) and a Practice NYSESLAT (Grades K-2) every year to our scholars. NYSESLAT sample questions are provided to demonstrate how the assessment gathers information about our scholars proficiency of the English language. The questions are annotated to show performance that scholars at corresponding levels must demonstrate in order to correctly answer each question. All classroom and out of classroom teachers analyze these scores and then make instructional plans to fortify scholar achievement. We also use the data from this practice assessment to help align instructional practices to the spring NYSESLAT that ELLs must take every year. Part IV: ELL Programming 6  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our school has a Freestanding ENL program where students are grouped heterogeneously across all grade levels. This provides our students with an opportunity to be exposed to peers at all levels of English proficiency. Our ENL providers and classroom teachers deliver integrated instruction in core content areas. The number of minutes is dependant on the scholar’s current proficiency level. Our Entering and Emerging scholars receive 180 minutes of ENL Stand Alone instruction with an ENL provider each week and 180 minutes of integrated instruction. Our Transition and Expanding scholars receive 180 minutes of integrated instruction while the Commanding scholars receive 90 minutes per week of integrated instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our Data Team works with our ENL Providers to create their schedules based on the proficiency levels of the students/classes they are servicing in conjunction with the CR Part 154.2 ENL Units of Study requirements. ENL providers deliver their integrated instruction in English Language Arts to ensure we are meeting the Content Area requirement for our ELLs. Once the schedules are created, they are then programmed for each individual scholar in STARS Classroom. Then they are checked against our current RLAT for accuracy. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At Pioneer Academy, we offer the English as a New Language (ENL) Program. ENL teachers use strategies to develop language and content knowledge in English. Some home language is used in order to give ELLs the extra support they need. Core content is delivered using any one of the following co-teaching models, in which ENL teachers co-teach with classroom teachers: Parallel Teaching, Teaming, or Station Teaching. ENL teachers include different components in their lessons. Some of these include building background knowledge, teaching academic vocabulary and using videos, realia, and visuals in their instruction. Other methods include Total Physical Response (TPR), word banks, word walls, concept maps, and Thinking Maps or graphic organizers (Frayer Model). ENL teachers are also capitalizing on home language by using glossaries for their ELL scholars. Math assessments are also provided in the home language. The use of cognates and integration of oral and written language into content areas are also being utilized, for example students write their explanations of their mathematical thinking and steps to solving math problems. ENL providers use sentence frames in their instruction and provide support and frequent opportunities for their scholars to write. Students discuss their ideas before writing and word banks, word walls, sentence frames, and sentence starters are all being utilized for this purpose. Teachers explicitly model strategies and academic language then clarify content by providing examples related to school or home. Teachers also use math manipulatives and games. The content for K-2 is the EngageNY Core Knowledge Language Arts (Listening and Learning and Skills Strand) and the EngageNY math curricula; for Grades 3-5 the curricula for ELA is EngageNY Expeditionary Learning and EngageNY for math. All of these curricula are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and the New York State New Language progressions. In addition, our school has implemented the Teacher’s College Writing Program - Units of Study, for grades K-5. In Stand Alone periods, ENL Teachers use the On Our Way to English. This curriculum is a “comprehensive English 7  language development program that is Domain-based instruction, which includes a focus on academic language and vocabulary development; thematic, content-based instruction; differentiated instruction for language and literacy; and a daily instructional routine in oral language, reading, and writing.” 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The Spanish Lab is administered within 10 days of enrollment. Our current ENL program is conducted solely in English therefore scholars are not evaluated in their home language. All assessments done measure their English skills. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE b. Newcomer c. Developing d. Long Term e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. The first step for our SIFE scholars is to learn and acclimate to a school setting. Their teachers and support personnel offer a safe space for scholars to understand and become familiar with school by giving tours of the school and meeting with parents immediately to understand background. Our SIFE scholars are given many opportunities for personal growth and self reflection through a range of visual guides for step by step processes. This is done by the use of language objectives, explicit teacher modeling, rubrics for outcomes, activating prior knowledge and providing explicit instruction in vocabulary and phonics instruction. Our educators provide them with visuals and offer support in their home language if possible. This is achieved by labeling the classroom environment with words and images, and offering sentence and paragraph frames for language development. Educators use TPR as needed to guide and scaffold their lessons for understanding. They also provide scholars with Thinking Maps to provide schema. The scholars learn to tier vocabulary to make associations to higher vocabulary by reading text passages and noticing the vocabulary words emphasized. They also learn strategies in which they segment longer texts into smaller sections to deepen their comprehension. Both the teacher and scholars are engaged in cooperative learning structures, actively participating with turn and talk and think-pair-share roles. C. Educators tailor their instruction for our developing ELLs (4 to 6 continuously enrolled school years), by continuing to support and review phonemic awareness, fluency, and comprehension. They provide explicit modeling, and visual guides for step by step processes as well as providing explicit rubrics for outcomes. Language objectives, vocabulary and prior knowledge are integrated in instruction as well. Our teachers provide clear and concise steps in order to achieve the objectives stated, often using TPR strategies to help our scholars understand what is being taught. This is done by activating background knowledge, providing multiple representations in math, using thinking maps, visuals, differentiating tasks for scholars within a small group and giving immediate feedback through one-to-one conferencing. Additional strategies that our school uses includes the Frayer Model for exploring vocabulary and meaning, self-assessment and peer-assessment checklists for monitoring personal growth, and partnership work between scholars of varying levels. We have also found that teaching our scholars how to tap out and blend words to listen to their syllables is helpful in building word fluency. The same strategy applies to reading comprehension as they are taught to chunk or segment part of the text into smaller sections in order to make meaning of the passage read. Our scholars are routinely given opportunities to turn and talk with their partners as well as to participate in whole class discussions. D. Our school addresses the needs of our long term ELLs by offering varying levels of support with instruction. These supports include small group guided instruction with differentiated tasks for each scholar, thinking maps for an organized outline of ideas, and teacher support and feedback towards their work and progress. Our teachers also pre-teach vocabulary words before a lesson and teach strategies that include taking a smaller part of a text to really understand the meaning behind 8  it. Our scholars are routinely engaged in active participation and engagement with their teacher and peers. Our educators often take an interest survey of their class to collect information about topics of interest. They use this feedback to facilitate instruction and assign group work within the scope of their lesson. They also provide visual tools such as thinking maps to provide concrete images of abstract thoughts along with self-assessment and peer-assessment checklists to self monitor understanding. E. Our former ELLs are the scholars who have exited ELL status yet still continue to receive support and services up to two years. Our educators pair these scholars with another scholar who happens to be on a different tier in order to productively engage in group work. The former ELLs are often used as facilitators within a small group to help their peers with their understanding of the topics being taught, and to foster communication of the English language. An example of a partnership would be a tier 1 partner who would work with a tier 3 scholar. Our educators also provide these scholars with a set of higher order thinking questions presented to them within their partnerships in all subject areas of our daily curriculum and instruction. These scholars utilize their mastery of their language proficiency to self-assess themselves in each content area by using a rubric, and also actively participate in think-pair-share circle discussion groups, often times leading their peers into classroom discussions. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The grade level materials that our educators use to teach ELLs and SWDs include a variety of instructional strategies and best practices to achieve academic achievement and language acquisition. They use sentence frames for our entering and emerging scholars, or sentence starters for our transitional scholars to support their oral and written language development. Educators also provide their classroom with structured opportunities for partner and whole class discussions about a topic through the use of turn and talk, think-pair-share, explicit modeling (I do, you do, we do) and the use of manipulatives to reinforce understanding of a topic. Scholars have access to their own Ipad’s where they can view clips of carefully selected videos to provide them with visual and auditory information in relation to the topic they are researching. Scholars engage in accountable talk where each one is expected to state a reason to explain his or her thinking, through the use of speaking prompts and accountable talk charts listed as a visual reminder. There is also evidence of conversation protocol (World Cafe, Question Formulation Technique - QFT, Kagan structures - inside/outside circle, turn and talk, stand-up, hand-up, pair-up). Educators teach academic vocabulary using multiple modalities and model think-aloud strategies to display their conceptual understanding of new information. Entering, emerging and select transitioning scholars use side-by-side English and Spanish texts for EngageNY problem set, homework set and exit tickets in Math. They also use concrete models for math content--use of manipulatives and real world materials to promote a deeper understanding of the material taught. Educators facilitate their Math instruction in a variety of ways from concrete to pictorial to abstract. They do this by asking for a choral response from scholars. When you have students echo back a word or phrase, it exposes them to new vocabulary and serves as a model for correct pronunciation, syntax, and grammar. They also formulate their questions to scholars to improve the quality of both their responses and their English. For example, instead of asking an intermediate-level student, "How did you solve the problem?" you might phrase the question this way: "What did you do first, second, and third to solve the problem?" This sort of question models the structure of a well-crafted answer: "First, I put the blocks in groups of ten. Second, I counted by tens. Third, I added the ones left over." Compare that with the response more likely to result from the first question: "I counted them." Educators also notice nonverbal responses from scholars to help them check for understanding without requiring them to produce language. ELLs can participate and show that they understand a concept, or agree or disagree with an idea, without having to talk. This is especially important for students whose comprehension of English is more advanced than their ability to speak the language. They may do this by using individual self-assessment rubric cards where green means “I understand”, yellow means “I’m not sure”, and red means “I don’t understand”. Educators also break apart a word into its smaller components. (i.e. prefix, suffix, root words) They use context clues to identify word meanings, and use TPR for vocabulary comprehension. A mix of heterogeneous and homogeneous groupings are found within the classroom. Some hands-on experiences include field trips, experiential learning, and student led Parent-Teacher Conferences 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 9  Our school uses curricular flexibility by conducting grade meetings from K through 5. We hold weekly planning periods with our teachers and staff. We use EngageNY and Expeditionary Learning to scaffold and differentiate instruction to meet the goals and needs of our ELLs and SWDs. There is common planning time where educators unpack the curriculum using our school’s KUD to provide tiered questioning and activities for small groups. We spend time discussing and modifying Engage and Core Knowledge lessons and access the Supplemental Resource Guide as often as needed. Our school consistently revisits and reteaches key concepts and skills during Centers as well as conducting fluency and lesson sprints. Our school uses instructional flexibility in a variety of ways. We conduct tuning protocols on every grade, K through 5. Educators use multiple models for teaching, including co-teaching, parallel teaching and team teaching. We modify and scaffold our curriculum to meet a variety of ELL and SWD needs. We offer support through the use of a language paraprofessional (where applicable), and have AIS and ELL providers on every grade level. Educators have small group work in both Guided Reading and Guided Math within their classrooms. Conferencing is used as a quick assessment tool to check and see if scholars are grasping the concept of the material being taught. We also have AIS providers for support and remediation. Our school uses scheduling flexibility to meet the demands of our scholars in terms of time and planning purposes. Our educators have the time and ability to pre-teach and reteach information to our scholars as needed on an ongoing basis. We have AIS teachers who push into classrooms for additional support. Our ELL providers give integrated classroom to ELLs (except for Stand Alone periods). Our Specialists give integrated classroom support for all periods in Math, ELA, Science and Social Studies. Our school holds meetings with all necessary staff and family members. Support staff is scheduled to push-in without overlapping common preps and common planning periods among staff members. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. A targeted intervention program we have for ELLs is the Leveled Literacy Intervention Program. This program offers explicit reading and language instruction, and is used by AIS providers. We also hold many afterschool programs for targeted intervention, such as Phonics and an LLI Afterschool Program with ENL Teachers. Also, we have a dedicated Academic Intervention Service Provider for each grade (K-5) who supports all students who are performing in the bottom third of the grade for ELA and Math. Our AIS providers deliver comprehensive and tailored instruction to meet the individual needs of the scholars they service. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our school will implement the On Our way to English program with our ELLs in grades K through 5. This new curriculum will be implemented by our ENL providers during their Stand Alone periods with their ELLs. This program is being implemented as a response to having a comprehensive English Language Development program that addresses the needs of our Entering and Emerging ELLs in particular. ENL providers will utilize its thematic units and scope and sequence to build oral language development and acquisition of communication skills. The grade-level lessons will be taught within a small group to help move our scholars into English language proficiency development. The program explicitly teaches all four modalities within each lesson and also includes an Interactive Smart Board component to help scholars visualize new words and ideas. Each scholar has an individual workbook to assist with instruction. The program has different rubrics for each modality and teachers assess scholars through ongoing formative assessments as well as summative unit assessments. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have never had a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our After School programs are open and available to all ELLs within our building. We have a variety of programs such as Phonics, ENL After School, Martial Arts, Chess Club, Morning Wakeup, Mighty Milers, Ping Pong, Activity Tuesday and Activity Wednesday. Parents or guardians need to fill out an application form for their children in order to remain in school to participate in the programs. All ENL scholars are invited to these programs through a permission slip. Our school also has a Mentoring Program where teachers and staff may volunteer across all grade levels to provide social, emotional, or academic support to scholars in need. Some of the scholars identified may demonstrate at-risk behaviors that qualify them for needing a 0  mentor. The mentors redirect their behaviors into having a positive mindset where the scholars feel safe and secure within the school. This program is open to all scholars, including our ELLs, in grades K through 5. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our school uses a range of instructional materials including technology to support ELLs. Technology is used to support targeted instruction for all ELLs by providing scholars with their own iPad’s within the classroom during content area instruction in both reading and writing, during specific times of their unit of study. Scholars use this tool to research a topic they are working on in relation to the lesson being taught. They might be learning about nonfiction and doing research on a topic of interest, such as dinosaurs. They would research this topic within their small group at their table, jotting down information and sharing it with their classmates. The iPad’s are also accessible in their home language for additional support. Educators use the Smart Board to conduct their lessons and scholars get an opportunity to interact with the Smart Board by putting their responses directly on it. The Smart Board also provides a visual for vocabulary development by having the words and pictures adjacent to one another, before introducing the reading lesson. Scholars also take in-house diagnostic assessments on their iPad’s such as iReady. Computers are often used within the classroom to reinforce concepts and skills that were taught. Scholars have access to Starfall, RAZ-kids, iReady, Xtra Math and IXL. Our Technology teacher has her 4th and 5th grade classes use technology to reinforce writing through the use of blogs. Other instructional materials being utilized within the classroom include sentence starters and sentence frames for varying levels of ELL proficiency, picture cards with the vocabulary word, hands-on manipulatives in Math, and classroom anchor charts. Our classrooms are labelled with pictures across the room, in both English and Spanish where applicable. Educators display word walls with specific vocabulary words related to their current unit of study. There are lesson and language objectives posted as well as task descriptions. Word boxes are used to provide a concrete representation of what is being learned in Math. The use of manipulatives such as tool kits, and self-assessment checklists are available for scholars to help track their individual progress 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our school has freestanding ENL and teachers use a variety of ways in which they make a solid connection to the scholars’ home language. This is done through read-alouds in the classroom that is connected their home language. We also offer books and bilingual dictionaries in their home language. Educators often use cognates to clarify meaning and encourage conversations with scholars in their home language. An example of this would be if a newcomer arrives and needs help in understanding an academic subject, their peer can assist them in their home language. We have an evident display of bilingual word walls, where each object in the classroom is labelled in both English and in Spanish. Educators also present the opportunity for scholars to make vocabulary connections by using their home language to access vocabulary in the classroom - for example, primero / primary colors. We have bilingual speech teachers who offer home language support to scholars as needed. Our school provides scaffolded translation to scholars through the use of Google translator, showing instructional videos in their home language, and utilizing support staff such as BPS and Paraprofessionals We also pair scholars according to their ability level. An example of this would be to pair a scholar with a higher home language ability, with a scholar who has a lower home language ability level. Scholars would also work in partnerships to ask and answer questions in their home language regarding the academic material they are currently learning 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our school designates our ELL providers and AIS teachers to each support a specific grade within our school. Scholars are placed in the appropriate grade according to their date of birth upon entry into the NYC school system. We currently have one ENL provider per grade for K through 5. Each grade in our school receives AIS support as well. In 3rd, 4th and 5th grades, there are two AIS providers one in Math and one in ELA. We have a SETSS provider for grades K through 5. We also have a school based support team that includes a psychologist, a social worker, and a family worker. The SBST team meets with scholars and families on an ongoing and as neeeed basis. Families can request appointments as per the need arises. We also have related service providers such as occupational therapists, speech providers, a physical therapist and a guidance counselor. These additional support staff are also available to speak with families. They follow their respective schedules in regards to the scholars they service and the amount of time each scholar receives. 1  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We share a building with District 75; and if requested, we will share resources with them. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our school invites families of ELLs to attend a Kindergarten orientation for those scholars who are newcomers. We provide an orientation video explaining parent choice options in NYC. We answer questions and provide information about all of the program choice options, as well as the current ENL program we have in our school. We also offer multiple workshops on a monthly basis throughout the year, where families of ELLs are invited to come to school to get a glimpse of their child’s academic instruction. Teachers, ENL providers, administration, and the parent coordinator are present to conduct family engagement time. This helps families understand their child’s monthly academic goals expected for them in their grade level, so that parents can better support them at home. Our school offers coaching to families with the help of our guidance counselor who invites parents to her presentations. She welcomes newcomers and their families and meets them one-on-one in order to find out more about them and help with their transition. She has conversations with scholars and their families in order to assess their needs and to develop ways in which to better support their social and emotional needs. Her workshops presented to parents are bilingual, and some topics discussed include scheduling, adjusting to a new school environment, hygiene, parental involvement,and how to facilitate communication between families and teachers. Our guidance counselor works with our classroom teachers to inform them of the middle school application process and helps troubleshoot some frequently asked questions that all parents have regarding this process. The office also answers any questions that have previously come up for our Newcomer 4th and 5th graders. All newcomer families are invited to a meeting with our guidance counselor to provide them with "next steps” information regarding the application process. Lastly, each scholar receives Middle School Application materials (Middle School, Guide, Application, step by step tutorials, Orientation Meetings) in the language indicated by the Home Language Survey. Our parent coordinator holds a Book Club for newcomer families in the library where they can discuss the books they are reading in their home language. We also offer technology and English classes as an additional support to families so they can better assist their children. Our parent coordinator conducts monthly workshops for parents to help navigate them through school processes and paperwork as well as to answer any school related questions. Families are being provided with an online Duolingo Program with open access two times a week in the library in order to help promote their language proficiency and development. The parent coordinator also provides a Current Events for families. Resources distributed include newspapers, magazines and newsletters in order to help families make connections to the world around them as well as to learn more about what their child is currently learning in school. Our school has an Incoming Immigrant Program where our school community takes newcomer scholars and their families on different trips around the city. This helps the newcomers learn and explore their new community, as well as helping families discover the wonders of the city they live in. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? This does not apply to Pioneer Academy. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? This does not apply to Pioneer Academy. 2  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers and support staff are all given professional development time during Monday afternoon from 2:30 to 3:50. During this time there is a school wide focus on ELL performance and we go about this by looking critically at the NYSESLAT modalities and test format. We begin with analyzing data from our Mock NYSESLAT and ELL Periodic Assessments in order to address meeting the needs of our scholars. This data helps to inform us on how to formulate an academic plan to initiate meeting the goals associated with the Common Core Learning Standards. This leads us into discussions focused on best practices for moving our ELLs towards academic achievement. In addition, professional development is given to all staff on non-student attendance days, as noted in the NYC Department of Education calendar. Our staff and all ENL providers attend BERS workshops where they are given best practices in language and reading strategies. Some of these strategies for Reading include 101 Best Strategies for Accelerating Reading Achievement, Guided Reading Workshop, and Powerful Strategies to Boost The Success of Your Struggling Readers. They also attend workshops that focus on language acquisition and development such as, Effective Instruction for English Language Learners and Scaffolding Instruction for English Language Learners, in order to build scholars’ academic language. Teachers are encouraged to access the BFSC Queens North PLO calendar to register for professional development that pertains to their subject area/teaching certification. There are no restrictions as to how often staff may attend outside professional development training, as long as there are no conflicts during the testing date windows. Educators gain knowledge and useful skills from attending professional development that focuses on applying purposeful reading strategies for struggling readers, addressing the linguistic demands of incoming ELLs, and scaffolding strategies for Reading and Writing literacy development. They also gain insight from professional development training that offers skills in which they can strengthen small group instruction by conferring, creating Strategy Groups and Guided Reading Groups in grades K through 5. Other training sessions include tools and strategies for building better vocabulary through scaffolded language and oral development skills. Our ELL providers attend ongoing professional development focused on building scholars’ academic language and cognitive development skills in order to produce an acquisition of the English language. Some examples of these include ELL Data Analysis Training, Helpful Strategies for New Teachers in a Small Class Setting, and Using Technology to Enhance English Language Learners for ELLs. The ELL Department also receives professional development in their new Stand Alone program called On Our Way to English. Other areas of training include differentiated instruction in meeting the needs of our SWDs, ELLs, and non ELLs. This is done through the Special Education Collaboration and offers the Orton Gillingham multisensory approach for struggling readers. Language acquisition versus disability training is offered for teacher development and instruction. Our school also has training for staff in IXL. This is a standards-aligned educational program which provides comprehensive coverage of pre-K through 12th grade Math, Language Arts, Science and Social Studies. Our scholars have access to this program and educators can view their individual students’ ability levels and track their progress online. This is a useful resource tool for scholars to access at home and it has a Spanish component for families as well 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Pioneer Academy provides PD on Mondays for all teachers that have centered on developing strategies for teaching ELLs, with a focus on analyzing and interpreting data related to the performance of ELLs on all assessments. We collect, analyze and interpret this data to make any necessary adjustments to instruction that would best support teaching practices and maximize student achievement. We maintain our records by providing a sign-in sheet for all staff that require their signature as proof of attendance, and we maintain this policy during all school related professional development. In addition, ENL teachers take turns in regularly attending and turn-keying workshops to their peers. For each PD that is provided on Monday, teachers initial the Table of Organization as proof of having attended. Teachers who go to off-site PDs are required to turn in a copy of the Agenda as proof of attendance and turn-key what they learn. Collaboration and communication of PD’s is exchanged 3  between staff on a regular basis to maximize the impact of student learning and achievement through the tools and resources they’ve been given Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school provides annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs two mornings per school year from 8:30am to 11:30am. These meetings take place in the school library. Most ENL teachers speak Spanish, but if not we use Google Translate or translators within the school. If parents are unable to meet at those times, we schedule parent meetings during preps or parent engagement times. Teachers will accommodate parents by making phone calls or exchanging letters if they are unable to come into school because of work. ELL providers set up their own times to meet with families and document these meetings in their individual Family Engagement notebooks that includes the date, signatures, and time of the appointment as well as the material that was discussed. They provide families with a copy of their child’s NYSESLAT score and summary report from the previous year. They answer any questions during this time and also explain how their child scored on that specific proficiency level. They present their own data collected on the child to address any current academic deficiencies or strengths they might display, as well as strategies to help them succeed. ENL providers address their current program’s goals of acquiring language proficiency and development by giving specific feedback to parents in reference to their child’s academic work. They show parents work samples, test scores, completed projects and any other material the scholar was working on during the lesson. They discuss targets of measure for each scholar and what they are expected to do at each grade band level. Discussions are centered on whether or not their linguistic purposes are being met, and specific strategies in which the scholar can make progressions. ENL providers also offer specific feedback that is pertinent to the scholar’s academic growth, and skills and strategies to utilize in order for them to perform well on the current year’s NYSESLAT. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school has a parent coordinator who conducts workshops for families throughout the year. Some ongoing programs include Coaching Families, which is a monthly program that provides parents with techniques and resources based on the current class unit and modules of study. This workshop allows families to learn how to assist their scholar at home. We also have Family Engagement time where families are invited to come in Tuesday mornings from 7:30 to 8:10, to view their children’s progression of work and to celebrate their published pieces. We also have a Book Club, which is a Spanish book club that was created to inspire the love of literature and reading for pleasure. Different reading strategies that students must acquire throughout the year are highlighted for parents and families. We offer technology assistance to families in order for them to assist their children. The technology workshops form a direct connection to the current technology that our students use here in school. The basic computer skills taught include keyboarding, navigating the Internet and career readiness. We also offer a Duolingo Program every Tuesday and Wednesday afternoon for families in the library. This self-guided program helps families learn basic English skills and allows them to self-assess how well they are acquiring the language in order to better help their children. All of these workshops provide families with the 21st Century tools that can better prepare them and their children for academic success. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. There is no additional information to add. 4  5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Cecilia Jackson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Pioneer Academy School DBN: 24Q307 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Cecilia Jackson Title Principal Rudelina Murray Assistant Principal Xirey Rivas Parent Coordinator Christina Armas ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ana Lucero Parent Eileen Edwards Teacher/Subject Area Cynthia Cannavo Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Compliance/Data Team Paola Melendez Other Guidance Counselor Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/16/17 10/16/17 10/16/17 10/16/17 10/16/17 10/16/17 10/16/17 10/16/17 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q307 School Name: Pioneer Academy Superintendent: Madeline Chan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Maria Caraballo Community Coordinator conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We conducted our assessment of written translation needs by reviewing necessary written communication of families generated through our ENL Department, the Parent Coordinator and the office support staff. The statistical data was derived from the Home Language Identification Survey, the RSDS: The School Data Summary Report, the RAPL: Adult Preferred Language Summary Report, and the RCPL: Parent's Preferred Language Report. In addition, Pioneer Academy uses correspondence, but is not limited to ELL Parent Orientation, Entitlement and Non-Entitlement Letters, Meet and Greet, Parent-Teacher Conference, ENL Department Family Conference, ENL Department Family Workshops, Teacher - Parent Conference, and Family Workshops. We conducted our oral interpretation needs assessment by gathering statistics provided by our Home Language Survey for Kindergarten and all new ELLs as well as conversations generated from our Parent Orientation meetings held in June and September. Our Parent Coordinator prepares a survey, as well as spoken in person and 8  in telephone conversations with our families. Our ENL teachers work together with the classroom teachers to identify which families are non English speakers and need oral interpretation regarding their students. The most accurate data derived from the eighty-four percent (84%) of our ELL parents are Native Spanish speakers. There is a 14.8% of parents classified as native English speakers. The remaining three percent (3%) include lower incidence languages such as Chinese, Urdu, Bengali, Arabic, Serbo-Croatian, Tibetan,and Araucanian. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The majority of the parents' preferred languages for both written and oral communication is Spanish with a total of 84% preferring both oral and written communication in Spanish. A 14.5% of English speakers preferred both written and oral communication in English. The remaining total1.5% of languages such as Araucanian, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Slovak, Tibetan and Urdue preferred both written and oral communication in their respective native languages. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 9  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The documents that the school typically disseminates every year that require translation are the correspondence from the ENL department such as placement letters, continuation of service letters, discontinuance of service letters, invitational flyers to attend the ENL monthly program parent workshops, ENL department presentations are all translated into Spanish, as is for the other 1.5% of languages represented at the school. We have support staff, administrators and teachers who contribute to the written translation of correspondence for Spanish speaking families. Our teaching staff has Bengali, Chinese and Arabic speakers who can assist in translation in those languages. In addition, much correspondence directed toward families generated citywide has available translations in written form from NYCDOE website. These services are timely because they are prepared simultaneously with the English correspondence. Pioneer Academy will use in-house translators to translate school materials. Any specific dates for Translation and Interpretation would be on an as needed basis which will be determined two to three weeks in advance of deadlines. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Pioneer Academy has created a strong partnership with the parents' of the school community. Throughout the year, the Parent Coordinator, Coaches, Community Coordinator, ENL department, and School Counselor facilitate family workshops on various topics from how to secure community resources to how to study with their child. Additionally, the school holds Teacher-Family Conferences four times per year, and every Tuesday morning schoolwide we hold Family Engagement Acitivities from grade K-5. These Family Engagement Activities are also held after school to give the families opportunities to participate in all of our activities. During these activities, there are plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 0  interpretors throughout the building, and translators are always paired with classroom teachers needing interpreting or translating support. The teachers and school staff also schedule informal one-to-one parent meetings to discuss their child's progress, and goals or to discuss any concerns the parents' may have concerning their childs' academic performance throughout the year. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As per Section VII of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, the school provides translated notification of the Parent's Bill of Rights, Welcome Poster, Parents' Guide to Language Acess, and Language ID Guide at security desk and main office. Most of our school based staff are bilingual and are able to assist the parents with translation and interpretation services when needed. The school safety plan will contain procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching school administrators. Signage will be provided if 10% of the children at the school speak primary language that is neither English nor a covered language. Most importantly, all parents will be notified of the primary language coverage, and that interpreters and translators will be made available when needed in order to properly communicate with them. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school has been instrumental in creating surveys that all parents, including all subgroups, fill out at the end of Family-Teacher Conferences, or other workshops facilitated throughout the year. These surveys are created using the Google Forms, and it has provided the Parent Coordinator and Academic Departments with information that can be 1  shared school wide with other staff members. The workshop facilitators also ask the parents at the end of every workshop of what their interests may be for future workshops, and how they would like to have certain workshops facilitated. For example, sometimes parents may request help with reading strategies, and prefer a smaller audience when participating. On other occasions, parents have requested assistance on a one-to-one basis in their preferred language. Furthermore, the Parent Coordinator uses a program that will text the parents reminders in their language. Most importantly, it is important to mention that the staff at Pioneer Academy are all readily available to parents before, during, and after school to meet with them. 2 
