 24Q311 School Name: CORONA ARTS AND SCIENCES ACADEMY Principal: BETH HERT   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Corona Arts & Sciences Academy 342400010311 6-8 98-11 44th Avenue, Corona, NY, 11368 School Number (DBN): 24Q311 718-507-3820 Phone Number: 718-507-3828 Fax: Beth Hert bhert@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Beth Hert Melida Barbosa Veronica Amador Crystal Joseph TBD- Meeting is 10/25/18 N/A N/A SandraVidal District Information Geographical District: 24 Madelene Chan Superintendent: 98-50 50 th Avenue, Corona, NY 11368 Superintendent’s Office Address: Mchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-592-3357 Phone Number: 718-592-3770 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Beth Hert Melida Barbosa Veronica Amador Regla Pineda N/A N/A Sandra Vidal Kujtim Daliposki Margaret Schumacher Crystal Joseph *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Assistant Principal, CSA Member/ Teacher, UFT Member/ Teacher, UFT   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) JoseLuisRomano GladysOrtiz AlejandrinaGarcia EmelynFernandez Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ ParentCoordinator N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Section I: Our mission is to create an academic partnership with the families of our school community. With a foundation built upon Literacy and the Arts, our goal is to educate the whole child. We will maintain a caring and creative school that   sets high expectations, encourages deep thinking, and engages all students in a rigorous learning environment that meets each student's individual needs. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. CASA is a middle school located in Corona, Queens. We are co-located at the Gabriela Mistral Campus with Riverview, a D-75 school. We are situated in a low socio-economic area, comprised of a culturally diverse student population. Currently, our student enrollment is 757 students and consists of 96% Hispanic, 3% Asian, 1% Black and 1% White students. Of these students, 24% are identified as English Language Learners and 19% are Students with Disabilities. CASA has an increased number of partnerships with many outside organizations. Currently, we collaborate with our Community-Based Organization (CBO), The Child Center of NY (CCNY), to facilitate an after-school program that operates Monday through Friday, from 2:41pm – 5:45pm. However, on Wednesdays, school is dismissed at 12:41pm. As a result, the program runs from 12:20pm – 3:45pm. Additionally, this program is an extension of our school day and assists students with their academic needs through small group collaboration. CCNY's goal is to build upon our mission to “educate the whole child through setting high expectations, encourage deep thinking, and engage all students in a rigorous learning environment” using the Arts and Sciences in their everyday curriculum. We have also partnered with the Gabriela Mistral Foundation, ROWNYC, NYC CHAMPS Sports Program, Queens Theatre in the Park, The Museum of Moving Image, The Middle School Science Initiative (Urban Advantage), and The Shubert Foundation Broadway Junior Guild. Our school decided to become a Progressive Redesign Opportunity School for Excellence (PROSE) school to benefit both the students and staff. For students, we have also added a social emotional element, called crew, that has started in the sixth grade and will eventually build up to the seventh grade and eighth grade by the 2020-2021 school year. Adapting a PROSE partnership allows our school to change the weekly schedule to make 4 out of the 5 days of the week longer, allowing crew to be included three times per week in our schedule. This creates a shorter day for students 1 day a week and allows the professional development time for the teachers to be combined in one longer afternoon. Not only does this allow us to support our students by offering clubs and after school activities 4 days a week, but it provides a more stable schedule for the teachers. There are benefits for both students and staff with the move to PROSE. To support our Students with Disabilities, we have partnered with ThinkCERCA, which a is a computer-based literacy program focused on argumentative writing and reading skills. Throughout the year, students cycle through the CERCA process a minimum of three times per content area in addition to the regular content curriculum. This process includes students making connections to the text, reading and engaging with a leveled text by annotating with a purpose, and creating an argumentative piece of writing. The purpose of implementing this program is to expose our SWDs to real-world reasoning skills. As our mission statement indicates, CASA recognizes the role of parents as partners in enhancing student learning and closing the achievement gap. Last year, 63% of our families attended a school event as indicated on the NYC School Survey Report. By consistently partnering with various community organizations and our families, we are committed to creating lifelong learners. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  Currently, 19% of our student population has an Individualized Education Plan (IEP). 42% of these students are being educated in an ICT setting, 39% are in a Self-Contained class, and 16% in a General Education classroom with SETSS support. Additionally, 61% receive Speech Services at least once per week, 19% receive counseling, 4% receive Occupational Therapy (OT), and 4% receive Physical Therapy (PT). CASA’s Dual-Language program instructs students in English and Spanish, which is the Native Language of the ELLs in the program. Speakers of the Native Language are taught alongside English-speaking students so that all students become bicultural, bi-literate, and fluent in both languages. Students speak and receive instruction in Science and Social Studies Common Core Standard Curricula using English and Spanish on alternating days. Currently, 17% of our student population receive Dual-Language instruction. The benefits of this program are:  English Language Learners (ELLs) and English proficient students learn together in two languages.   Students develop new language skills and learn academic content in two languages. Students practice and share language and culture with each other. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the Quality Review Report for the 2016-2017 school year, our school was rated Proficient on several Instructional Core indicators: Indicator 4.1 – Observe teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcome to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection; 1.2- Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products, and 2.2 - Align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. Additional findings from our Quality Review Report indicate that administration meets with all teachers face-to-face after each formal or informal observation. During these meetings, teachers and administrators discuss all aspects of the lesson including lesson planning, pedagogical practice, and feedback regarding strengths and targeted areas of focus. In addition, administrator feedback captures strengths, identifies challenges, and articulates clear expectations. Teachers are assisting in developing feedback by self-reflecting, and this is captured in observation reports. As indicated in the 2016-2017 Quality Review Report, an area of focus is indicator 1.1 – Ensuring engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subject accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or Content Standards. According to the report, reviewed lesson plans displayed evidence of alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards (Common Core) and the integration of the pedagogical shifts demanded by those standards; evidence of rigorous tasks and questioning strategies was seen throughout several of the lesson plans reviewed; and most lesson plans included learning objectives, Warm-ups, guiding questions, essential skills, modeling, vocabulary, assessment, differentiation for English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities, and homework. In addition, planning included specific grouping for Students with Disabilities and ELLs, providing additional support during the construction of their anemometers. However, intentional entry points and scaffolds for higher performing students was not evidenced in planning or in the classroom. As a result, focusing on providing the appropriate scaffolds for all types of learners will be a focus for the 2018-2019 school year. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q311 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 733 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 47 24 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 95.4% % Reduced Lunch 23.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.1% 96.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.19 0% 43% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 31.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 40 40 96.2% 2.0% 18.8% 1.1% 2.0% 0.3% 2 5% 5 24.3% 48% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. With our commitment to working to increase the discourse in all content areas, we understand the need to monitor the performance of all of our students including our students with disabilities and our English Language Learners. We understand the need to monitor the student progress for each child during the school year. During the 2017-2018 school year, the teachers, students and parents were surveyed using the School Quality Guide. As noted in the supportive environment section, an area of celebration is as follows:  Our school received a 93% positive response of students say that they are learning a lot in their classes to prepare them for the next level or grade as compared to 91% citywide.  100% of teachers plan and provide opportunity for reading and writing experiences grounded in evidence from text, both literary and informational as compared to 93% citywide.  87% of our students say that their classes make them think critically as compared to 81% of students in the district and 80% of students citywide. According to the 2018 New York State English Language Arts assessment, our current Students with Disabilities scores were as follows:  24% of our 6th grade Students with Disabilities achieved a level 2 or higher on the ELA assessment.  24% of our 7th grade Students with Disabilities achieved a level 2 or higher on the ELA assessment.  67% of our 8th grade Students with Disabilities achieved a level 2 or higher on the ELA assessment.  29% of our Students with Disabilities (6th, 7th & 8th grades) achieved a level 2 or higher on the ELA assessment. According to the 2018 New York State English Language Arts assessment, our current 7th & 8th grade Students with Disabilities scores were as follows:  20% of our 6th grade Students with Disabilities achieved a level 2 or higher on the Math assessment.  21% of our 7th grade Students with Disabilities achieved a level 2 or higher on the Math assessment.  47% of our 8th grade Students with Disabilities achieved a level 2 or higher on the Math assessment.  23% of our Students with Disabilities (6th, 7Th & 8th grades) achieved a level 2 or higher on the Math assessment. In January of 2017, our school underwent a Quality Review (QR). According to our Quality Review Report, our school was rated as proficient at ensuring engaging, rigorous and coherent curricula in all subjects accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards; developing teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson 3  Framework for Teaching, aligned to curricula, engaging and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products and aligning assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on students learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 33% of our Students with Disabilities will achieve a level 2 or higher as measured by the NYS Common Core ELA assessment and 27% will achieve a level 2 or higher as measured by the NYS Common Core Math assessment. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development-“Choose your own adventure” professional development paired with inter-Visitation intended to increase discourse and engagement in the classroom. All pedagogical Staff Start on 9/18 and end on 6/19 Establishing a focus on serving students and families in the community through partnership and innovative practice through our partnerships. i.e.: Urban Advantage, New York Hall of Science All pedagogical Staff Start on 9/18 and end on 6/19 Classroom inter-visitation conducted in teacher’s team triads to support our instructional focus and modeled protocols during professional development. In addition, targeted classroom inter-visitation by peer collaborative teacher based on individual need. All pedagogical Staff Start on 9/18 and end on 6/19 Administration PD/PLC Leaders Administration Administration Classroom supports for SWDs (small group instructions, scaffolds and supports) during the school day and in our Saturday Academy. Student with Disabilities Start on 9/18 and end on 6/19 Content, Special Education, and AIS teachers Weekly Common planning periods focused on student inquiry and the use of data to make instructional decisions on targeted student subgroups. Teacher Teams Start on 9/18 and end on 6/19 Instructional Cabinet N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents of Students with Disabilities will be targeted to attend Parent Empowerment Time (PET) office hours, which will focus on providing parents with the necessary tools to assist their child at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to effectively leverage our resources to achieve and implement our goals the teachers will be provided the following Professional Development resources. Teachers will implement a variety of differentiated books studies with 5  time provided for book discussion overview and modeling of instructional Strategies. In addition, a professional development calendar will provide as a framework of facilitation. In addition, teachers will provide with inter-visitation resources that include NYC Danielson training on “Enhancing Professional Practice: Inter-Visitation Series” for instructional Cabinet. This information will be Turnkey by the instructional Cabinet to the teachers. Furthermore, teachers will be given date from previous years observations to enhance their understanding of school wide focuses. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, ELA benchmark will show that 30% of our students with disabilities (SWDs) are showing progress to achieving a level 2 or higher as measured by the NYS Common Core ELA assessment. Additionally, the Math benchmark will show that 24% of our SWDs are showing progress to achieving a level 2 or higher on the as measured by the NYS Common Core Math assessment. . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Mastery Connect, ELA Benchmark Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? With our commitment to working to increase our students feeling of a supportive environment, we understand that need to monitor student behavior in the classroom. During the 2017-2018 school year, the teachers, students and parents were surveyed using the School Quality Guide. As noted in the supportive environment section, an area of celebration is as follows  91% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school tell their students they believe they can achieve high academic standards.  94% of students agreed or strongly agreed that they feel safe in their classes at their school. As noted in the supportive environment section, an area of growth is as follows:  55% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes at their school, students says that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students at their school as compared to 60% in the district and 49% citywide.  48% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes at their school, most students behave well even when the teacher isn’t watching.  62% of students say that their teachers support them when they are upset. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of our 6thgrade students and 80% of our 7th and 8th grade students will feel supported academically and emotionally as assessed by the New York City Survey Report. To reach the 100% goal, staff members will receive training and support from Outward Bound Schools for the newly created 6th grade CREW initiative. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Provide multiple opportunities for families to become a part of our school community. Families and students Create a welcoming environment in which all parents are included in the planning of school wide events, such as trips, special events, teacher recruitment Families and students Provide new staff members with in-house summer professional development which introduces them to the inclusive culture and norms of our building. New Staff Provide all staff members an opportunity to attend off site professional development that pertains to engaging and supporting families. All pedagogical staff All school staff All school staff Veteran staff and administration. All school staff Start on 10/2018 and end on 6/19 Start on 10/2018 and end on 6/19 Start on 10/2018 and end on 6/19 Start on 10/2018 and end on 6/19 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. At CASA, we begin supporting our students and families through the 6th grade summer orientation to prepare students for the transition to middle school. During the event students and families are introduced to our core values and school-wide expectations. Throughout the school year we host events such as meet the teacher, parent teacher conferences (targeted and general), and parent teacher team workshops to foster a strong home to school connection. We also have an open door policy that encourages both parents and students to voice their questions and/or concerns. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development books, technology, Google forms 8  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 85% of our 6th grade students and 60% of our 7th and 8th grade students will feel supported by a teacher as measured by the School Survey Report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A survey using the language similar to the New York City School Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. It is evident that collaboration among teachers impacts school morale, teacher growth and student performance. With this is mind, our school is structured to support peer collaboration. During the 2017-2018 school year, the teachers, students and parents were surveyed using the School Quality Guide. As noted in the “Collaborative Teachers” component, an area of celebration is as follows:  89% of teachers say that their professional development experiences this year have been sustained and coherent as compared to 75% in the district and 83% citywide.  84% of teachers say that they had opportunities to work productively with colleagues at their school on professional development.  88% of teachers say that their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas. The Quality Review indicator 4.2 is rated as proficient.  Findings show that structured teacher collaborations allow teachers to share best practices and are improving teaching practices. As a result, teacher pedagogical capacity is strengthened by said teacher collaborations. According to the Quality Review report, an area of focus is  To ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards. In addition, although there was planning that included specific grouping of students with disabilities and ELLs that provided additional support, intentional entry points and scaffolds for higher performing students was not evidenced in the planning or in the classroom.  93% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 0  By June of 2019, Professional Learning Communities will focus on inter-visitation and best practices during Professional Development Wednesdays. As a result, 92% of teachers will agree or strongly agree that the Project-Based Learning professional development experiences this year have been meaningful and relevant. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Survey the staff regarding quality of Professional Development as detailed in the Collaborative Teachers section of the School Quality Guide All teachers Provide all teachers an opportunity to attend borough Field Support and Showcase School Professional Development and turnkey that information to other staff members. All teachers We will inter-visit team members using similar to increase collaboration and determine best practices. Targeted Teachers Administrators Administrators, PD/PLC Leads Administrators Start on 9/2018 and end on 6/2019 Start on 9/2018 and end on 6/2019 Start on 9/2018 and end on 6/2019 N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During Parent Teacher Teams, teachers collaborate within content area groups to share best practices with parents regarding content strategies. During PTA meetings content teams collaborate and utilize students to present classroom experiences to families. A monthly newsletter is distributed to parents informing parents of curriculum and teacher strategies Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development books, Technology, Google form Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, PLC leads will conduct a survey asking teachers to evaluate their Professional Development experience. As a result, 80% will agree or strongly agree that the Project-Based Learning professional development experiences this year have been meaningful and relevant. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mastery Connect & Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. With our commitment to working to increase the discourse in all content areas, we understand the need to monitor teacher’s use of discussion protocols and higher order thinking question. According to Advance, during the 2017-2018 school year, our teachers were assessed at the following percentages in Domain 3:  Component 3b – Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques: Out of 210 observations, 1% were rated ineffective, 39% were rated developing, 59% were rated effective, and 1% were rated highly effective.  Component 3c – Engaging Students in Learning: Out of 210 observations, 44% were rated developing, 54% were rated effective, and 2% were rated highly effective. During the 2017-2018 school year, the teachers, students and parents were surveyed using the School Quality Guide. As noted in the “Effective School Leadership” component, an area of celebration is as follows:  100% of teachers say that the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parents and teacher leaders as compare to 92% in the district and 91% citywide.  92% of teacher say that the principal sets high standards for student learning as compared to 96% in the district and 93% citywide. January of 2017, our school underwent a Quality Review (QR). As noted on 3 of the QR report, an area of celebration in our school as it pertains to the Capacity Framework element of “Teacher Support & Supervision” is as follows:  Administration meets with all teachers face to face after formal or informal observations. During these   meetings, teacher and administrators discuss all aspects of the lesson including lesson planning. Feedback from administration is precise, measurable and actionable. For example, one informal observation report targeted higher order thinking questioning strategies as an area of focus Feedback is delivered to teachers in a way that captures strengths, identifies challenges, and articulates clear expectations.  New teachers are supported by using a cycle of strategically developed observations which include inter-visitations to other teachers that have the skill that has been identified as their area of growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 4  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 65% of the overall observations will be rated effective or highly effective in components 3b and 60 % will be rated effective and highly effective in component 3c as assessed by the Danielson Rubric and Advance. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Provide opportunities for all teachers to conduct inter-visitations with their colleagues and gain experience and ideas to engage students in learning. All teachers Provide new and targeted teachers with a mentor who will work with individuals weekly, through classroom observations and meetings, to discuss in implementing new teaching strategies that will meet their professional goals. All new teachers in the DOE Using differentiated professional development as a resource to help foster classroom discourse and classroom engagement. All teachers Provide all teachers an opportunity to attend Borough Field Support Professional Developments that pertain to student discourse and classroom engagement. All teachers Start on 10/2018 and end of 06/2019 Start on 10/2018 and end of 06/2019 Start on 10/2018 and end of 06/2019 Start on 10/2018 and end of 06/2019 School Administration and PLC leads. School Administration and Mentors School Administration, Mentors, and PLC Leads School Administration and PLC Leads 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During “Meet-the-Teacher” Night and Parent Empowerment Time, parents are informed of the curriculum and expectations for each content area. In addition, during PTA meetings, parents are informed of workshop that new and veteran teachers attend as well as additional support that is provided for all new teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development, Professional Development resources, Technology Equipment/Upgrades, Software subscriptions (TeachBoost), Document Cameras Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 6  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school administrators would have conducted at least 2 observations for each teacher in all content areas and during the post observations, they would have provided actionable next steps that pertain to components 3b and 3c, which includes but not limited to inter-visitations with colleagues who have been rated effective or highly-effective in targeted areas. As a result, 50% of the observations would be rated effective or highly effective in component 3b and 50% will be rated effective or highly effective in component 3c. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teach Boost and Advance Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As of this 2017-2018 school year:  83% of parents attended the "Meet the Teacher" Night  46% of the parents attended parent engagement Tuesday During the 2017-2018 school year, the teachers, students and parents were surveyed using the School Quality Guide. As noted in the “Strong Family-Community Ties” component, an area of celebration is as follows:  96% of families say that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school.  90% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn.  86% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child’s classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child.  91% of families say that teachers work closely with families to meet students' needs. The following data represents areas of need:  48% of families say that they have been asked if had the opportunity to volunteer time to support the school. During the 2017-18 school year, at least 9% of the parents attended at least one PTA meeting. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 100% of our 6th grade parents will attend Student-Led Conferences (SLC) in November and March. As a result, 90% of the 6th grade students whose parents attend a meeting will show a 10 percentage points increase on the January benchmark and a 20 percentage points on the May benchmark. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Using School Messenger, we will make direct phone calls to parents notifying them of PTT meeting, Coffee with Counselors, and parent workshops. Family & Students Face to face with counselors to discuss Engrade, & the High School Admissions process. Family & Students Parents of targeted students are invited to attended a series of content related workshop that focus on providing parents with the tools necessary to assist their child academically. Family & Students Teacher inquiry planning teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teacher inquiry planning teams Counselors, Parent Coordinator, Administration Counselors, Parent Coordinator Teachers, Parent Coordinator, and Administration Administration & Pedagogical staff Start on 9/2018 and end of 06/2019 Start on 9/2018 and end of 06/2019 Start on 9/2018 and end of 06/2019 Start on 9/2018 and end of 06/2019 If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. During "Meet the Teacher" Night, Parent Empowerment Time, Counselor monthly workshops, parent walk-ins to meet with counselors/teachers, parents are informed of and offered opportunities to volunteer at the school. In addition, PTA meetings, parents are informed of workshops, and opportunities for them to come in to the school and be present. As well as additional support that is provided for all new teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Technology, paper, outside presenters. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 9  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, 90% of our 6th grade parents will have attended the November Student-Led Conferences (SLC). As a result, 45% of 6th grade students whose parents attended the meeting will show a 10% increase on the January benchmark. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-in sheets , survey, MasteryConnect Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Used multiple sources (NYS ELA Assessment, Teacher observations Assessments, Report Cards, Performance Series data) to identify students who are not meeting the standards in ELA Used multiple sources (NYS Math Assessment, Teacher observations and assessments, Report Cards, Performance Series, & Khan Academy assessments) to identify students who are not meeting standards in math. Teacher observations and assessments, Edperformance Lexile level Teacher observations and assessments, Edperformance Lexile level Guidance Counselor reports, SIT observations, Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction, Pull-Out, Push-In, one-on-one. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Rally, Finish Line, Words Their Way, Teacher Created Materials, Word Sorts, Word Generation Big Ideas Math, Khan Academy, Finish Line, Teacher Created Materials, Carnegie Learning Series Small Group instruction, Pull-Out, Push-In, one-on-one RTI through the Inquiry process, Smart Science, RTI through the Inquiry process, Edperformance One-on-One Counseling, Small Small group instruction Small group instruction Crisis Intervention Team meets monthly to discuss individual students regarding When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day in small group and AIS periods, after school, and Tuesday’s Parent Engagement Time. Saturday Academy will be starting in January. During the school day in small group and AIS periods, after school, and Tuesday’s Parent Engagement Time. Saturday Academy will be starting in January. During the school day, after school, and Tuesday’s Parent Engagement Time During the school day, after school, and Tuesday’s Parent Engagement Time During the school day and Tuesday’s 1 School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Group Counseling, SIT Team attendance, behavior, concerns, and educational progress Parent Engagement Time 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment for staff in our new middle school begins in January. Once postings are put up, staff members are interviewed by a hiring committee made up of administration, teachers, and support staff. There is a priority focus for teachers that hold multiple licenses and/or bilingual extensions to support our Dual Language Program. Once hired, new staff engages in six half-day sessions of professional development during the summer months. Three of the sessions focus on culture building while the additional three focus on instruction and lesson planning. Teachers are partnered up with content teachers from both inside CASA and also with a neighboring school to review curriculum (i.e. curriculum maps, pacing calendars, unit assessments, performance tasks, etc.). By September, all new staff members are assigned a mentor that they meet with on a weekly basis. Mentors visit with new teachers both during and outside of class time to provide feedback on classroom norming, lesson planning, lesson execution, student engagement, questioning and discussion, data collection and analysis, etc. In addition, teachers are assigned a Common Planning period to meet with grade level and department teams for support. When necessary, targeted inter-visitation plans are created. The professional development plan was created by our PD team and focuses most of the content around our school’s Instructional Focus for 2016-2017. With the launch of a differentiated book studies, our teaching staff is also engaging in rounds of inter-visitation to provide feedback to peers regarding the work around our PD sessions. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 5  The professional development plan was created by our PD team and focuses most of the content around our school’s Instructional Focus for 2018-2019. With the launch of a differentiated book studies, our teaching staff is also engaging in rounds of inter-visitation to provide feedback to peers regarding the work around our PD sessions. In addition, there are targeted PD sessions where teaching staff are provided choice PDs that they are able to align with next steps for professional growth that have been outlined in individual observation feedback. In addition, all staff members (teachers, administrators, and paraprofessionals) have attended professional development sessions that were targeted towards their individual needs. Such sessions have been offered by both our Support Network (BFS Queens North) and the Department of Education (i.e. Danielson training on Enhancing Professional Practice). In addition, select staff members have sought out opportunities to attend Showcase School events so that they are able to bring back additional practices to share with our school community. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Beginning in June, a “MOSL” committee is selected to make school-wide decisions for the local assessments that will be calculated into each teacher’s rating. It is this committee that also determines the baseline and benchmark assessments that we will administer throughout the course of the school year. This committee meets no less than four times from June – September. Following each meeting, members are responsible for sharing information and obtaining feedback from their colleagues to make an informed decision. 6  The Instructional Cabinet, made up of some members of the MOSL Committee in addition to other staff, provide feedback and assessment information in order to make decisions regarding professional development and the improvement of instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local $467,132.00 0 22,478.00 0 $5,955,493.00 X N/A X N/A X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 7 Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A – Part 4b, Section 5D – Part 4b, Section 5E – Part 1, Section 5E – Part 4b N/A Section 5A – Part 4b, Section 5D – Part 4b, Section 5E – Part 1, Section 5E – Part 4b N/A Section 5A – Part 4b, Section 5D – Part 4b, Section 5E – Part 1, Section 5E – Part 4b  may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 8   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Corona Arts & Sciences Academy (CASA), in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students CASA will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress through an established Parent Empowerment Team (PET);  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality 0  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the No Child Left Behind Act; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;  1   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Corona Arts & Sciences Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:  engaging families in our Parent Empowerment Team (PET) to support individual student progress and growth;  conducting student-led conferences (SLCs) each semester during which the individual child will analyze and reflect on their own work to share their strengths and identify next steps; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;     providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  2  providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences;  providing our Parent Coordinator with a mobile communication device; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary;  3 read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;    promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; attend SLCs in the fall and spring semesters and participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;    become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn and reflect often on my progress as a learner, analyzing my own work and preparing for SLCs. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 46 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: During the 2018-2019 school year, our Title III program will be available to 180 current English language learners. We designed our program to complement the bilingual, integrated ENL, and stand alone ENL services that our ELLs receive during the school week. The program will utilize an arts and science focus to improve students' reading, writing, listening and speaking skills, thereby enhancing their overall academic achievement. Based on NYSESLAT scores, the trend that we have identified is that our students need the most support with academic writing. As a result, we will implement a targeted intervention for writing. Balanced Literacy within the workshop model provides the structure and grouping to facilitate instruction and practice in a small-group setting. Through teacher-student conferences, progress is analyzed, charted, and individualized. Instruction is data-driven; literacy connects the concepts. Services also include ENL support and differentiated instruction during the work period through the Writer’s Workshop during the designated literacy period. Assessing and conferring will result in progress made and instruction required. ENL strategies and classroom structures include daily source book writing, vocabulary building activities, leveled libraries, and the use of technology. In order to ensure that ELL students meet the Common Core State Standards, the ENL program is developed with each students specific goals and needs in mind. This approach targets a variety of language levels and affords smaller learning environments. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: For the 2018-2019 school year, our Title III program will serve 180 ELLs of which 94 are in the 6th grade, 71 are in the 7th grade, and 15 are in the 8th grade. The subgroups include Long Terms ELLs, Newcomer ELLs, and ELLs with IEPs who are performing significantly below grade level. Within the program, instruction will be differentiated according to students' current ENL levels and specific language needs. Registration forms will be sent home in the parents' preferred language and a Title III informational meeting will be held to introduce the program to parents. Schedule and Duration: For the 2018-2019 school year, our Title III program will run for 13 Saturdays from 9:00 am to 12:00 pm. For the 2018-2019 school year, our Title III program will begin Saturday, January 26, 2019 through and including Saturday, May 18 2019. The program incorporates a reader's theatre program through which students practice reading, writing, speaking and listening as well as Khan Academy for Mathematics. Weekly, ELLs receive focused intervention during through the use of Playbook's Reader's Theatre. The program allows students to put into practice all the knowledge that they are learning during direction instruction through incorporation of the four modalities of reading, writing, listening and speaking. This program is especially beneficial for newcomer ELLs as it allows them a safe space to practice their English and to hear English language models in their classmates that will aid in their pronunciation. Native Language support is infused through all content areas as needed. As evidenced, by the use of word banks, glossaries, native language 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information texts, and bilingual language translation. The program will culminate with a performance of a play selected by the students. Families of participating students will be invited to celebrate student achievement.The school's ELL coordinator, principal and assistant principal will supervise the program and its implementation. In addition, they will monitor student attendance by taking daily attendance and communicating with parents. Our Title III program will run simultaneously with our CASA Saturday Academy therefore, the above mentioned will be at no cost to Title III. Language of Instruction: For the 2018-2019 school year, the language of instruction for our Title III program will be English. Students will also receive home language through such means as bilingual authentic texts (e.g., NewsELA), glossaries, picture dictionaries, and teacher support. Our Title III Saturday Academy will target students in year 4, 5 or 6 of ELL services as determined by the EDAT. In this way, we plan to identify and target the needs of potential long term ELLs (LTEs) and LTEs who have not made significant progress in the last two years. Number of Teachers and Certifications: For the 2018-2019 school year, our Title III program will be taught by two certified ENL teachers and two Common Branch or content teachers. ENL teachers will plan alongside Common Branch teachers to develop lessons that provide students in the program with language support necessary to become college and career ready. We will follow a collaborative team teaching model of language instruction and each team teaching pair will consist of one certified ENL teacher and one certified Common Branch or content teachers. Grouping will be a combination of heterogeneous grouping to allow for interaction with ELLs of varied language levels and homogeneous grouping to allow for targeted instruction based on student's needs. Types of Materials: For the 2018-2019 school year, our Title III program will utilize a variety of instructional materials such as Everyday English Plus, Continental Press's "New York ELLs", NewsELA, and authentic texts that will provide students with real-life opportunities for language use. In addition, we are utilizing programs to provide Reader's Theatre. All of the materials above complement the core instruction that students receive everyday, with the exception of New York ELLs and Reader's Theatre, which are exclusively used during Saturday Academy. We are also researching ways to incorporate STEM opportunities into the program. The above mentioned instructional materials are at no cost to Title III program with the exception of Continental Press's New York ELLs. Materials will be used based on teacher assessment of student needs informed by a variety of data sources such as New York State ELA and Math scores, content area benchmark data, 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 NYSESLAT data, data collected during PLC team meetings, and formative assessment. Utilizing the above mentioned information Title III instruction will focus on improving and enhancing the acquisition of the English language, as well as facilitating the learning in core subject areas for CASA's ELL population. Student progress will be monitored through formative teacher assessment (conferencing) and computer-based assessments. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 7  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: Rationale: For the 2018-2019 school year, MSQ311 will provide all of our teachers who provide instruction to current ELLs and former ELLs with high quality professional development. This will be infused with best practices for working with ELLs. This will be accomplished through a combination of in-house, Central, and FSC-sponsored workshops. These workshops are not funded by Title III monies. The focus of these workshops will be language acquisition, ESL methodologies, and content-based ENL instruction. Teacher to receive training: ALL Schedule and Duration: Varied Schedule and duration/Topics to be covered/Name of provider: November 2018 "Who Are Our ELLs?" Lunch & Learn series (ELL coordinator Melida Barbosa) - All staff Fall 2018 - Queens North FSC ELL Professional Learning Series - ENL & bilingual teachers Year-long - Teacher-designed inquiry cycles focusing on ELL students (Wednesday staff PD + weekly PLC team meetings) connected to our whole-school foci (Project-Based Learning, academic discourse) Title III teachers will also be provided with an orientation to the program and expectations. They will be provided with the opportunity to attend ELL-specific professional development (including but not limited to those listed above) to support their instruction. These strategies will equip teachers with tools necessary to engage students in content-based conversations, reading, and writing. PD sessions will be tied back to our goal, which is to address the specific writing needs of the ELLs in our building. Copies of all agendas and attendance sheets will be maintained by the AP, Amanda Gardner, and ELL coordinator Melida Barbosa. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: CASA is committed to creating a solid home-to-school connection for our ELL families. This will be achieved by inviting parents not only into our school but also into our classrooms. The goal is to have parents involved in every aspect of the school community. Since parental engagement is a key ingredient for student success, faculty and staff will work closely to design activities that are both engaging and interactive. Schedule and Duration: Topic: Title III Info Session 8  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Rationale: During this information session parents will be introduced to and receive a general overview of our Title III Saturday Academy: teachers, instructional approach, goals of the program and materials that will be utilized during the program. Date: Thursday, 1/17/19 Time: 10:00 - 10:30 AM (following PTA) Name of Provider: Ms. Melida Barbosa Audience: Parents of current ELLs Topic: Title III “Reading is the Key to Success” parent workshop Rationale: During this workshop parents will learn the about the role of literacy in their children’s lives and how the time spent reading at home can impact their child’s academic progress. In addition, parents will go home with specific strategies that they can use to support their child’s literacy development. Date: Tuesday, 2/12/19 Time: 6:00 - 7:00 PM Name of Provider: Ms. Barbosa Audience: Parents of current ELLs Topic: 2018-2019 Title III Celebration Rationale: Parents will be invited to take part in a celebration in honor of student achievement during the 2016-2017 title III program. Date: Saturday, 5/18/19 Time: 11:00 AM - 12:00 PM Name of Provider: 2018-2019 Title III Program Instructional Staff Audience: Parents of current ELLs Parent Notification of these activities: Parents will be notified of these activities through bilingual flyers, school door postings, and School Messenger calls from the parent coordinator in parents' preferred language. We will work closely with bilingual staff to ensure that appropriate translation services are provided at all meetings and workshops. Agendas and attendance sheets will be maintained the AP and ELL coordinator. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 9  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name Corona Arts & Sciences Academy Borough Queens School Number 311 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Beth Hert Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Melida Barbosa Teacher/Subject Area Olga De La Cruz/ELA & HLA Teacher/Subject Area Bethany Wolff/Special Educatio Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Madelene Chan Assistant Principal Amanda Gardner Coach N/A School Counselor Jacqueline Burgos Parent Veronica Amador Parent Coordinator Maria Hernandez Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics 1  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 733 Total number of ELLs 175 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 23.87% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 Spanish Spanish Spanish 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 3 0 2 0 5 0 6 1 1 7 1 1 8 1 1 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 1 1 1 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In addition to 2016 NYSESLAT data, Q311 also utilizes data collected from Performance Series, a computer based literacy assessment, which provides students with a baseline that adjusts in difficulty based on student answers. Student progress is assessed and lexile levels are calculated. Beginning in the 2017-2018 school year, teachers will administer a comprehensive, teacher-created, standards-aligned baseline assessment in each content area in September. Both students and teachers will use the resulting data to set goals and monitor student progress based on end-of-unit assessments. Home language support is provided when necessary based on the baseline/benchmark assessments. The data sets show that our students are in need of writing skills such as the ability to cite textual evidence and following specific English language conventions (i.e. run-on sentences, subject-verb agreement, transitions and structures). Utilizing data sources, teachers will determine which component (decoding, fluency or reading comprehension) they will use to plan and differentiate their instruction accordingly. 2  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Beginning in the 2017-2018 school year, teachers will administer a comprehensive, teacher-created, standards-aligned baseline assessment in each content area in September. Both students and teachers will use the resulting data to set goals and monitor student progress based on end-of-unit assessments. Home language support is provided when necessary based on the baseline/benchmark assessments. The data sets show that our students are in need of writing skills such as the ability to cite textual evidence and following specific English language conventions (i.e. run-on sentences, subject-verb agreement, transitions and structures). Utilizing data sources, teachers will determine which component (decoding, fluency or reading comprehension) they will use to plan and differentiate their instruction accordingly. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT in order to identify baseline student performance and measure our students' yearly progress toward language-learning goals. This year, we will also review data from the Exame de Lectura en Espanol (ELE) as well as the NYC Home Language Arts Performance Task. In our fourth year as a school, Q311's ELL students are demonstrating clear progress in English language development as measured by the NYSESLAT. Over the last three years (2014-2016), a total of 58 students have tested Commanding/Proficient. Students who tested out during the last two years continue to receive services according to CR Part 154. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? School leadership and the ELL coordinator will review summative student data over the summer in order to identify trends over time, including areas of growth and areas of challenge by modality. This data provides a preliminary road map for curriculum and instruction for the upcoming school year (i.e., adjusting in-class scaffolds and stand-alone support) for individuals and groups of students. This information will be used for programming by administrators and disseminated to teacher to be used in lesson planning. small group instruction, and in-class interventions throughout the year. All teachers will use this information to drive instruction and communicate with parents about their child's language learning progress. Special education teachers will use the data to inform IEPs and student goals. In addition, we will design our AIS groups with the specific needs of ELL students in mind. Our Title III Saturday Academy will target students in year 4, 5 or 6 of ELL services as determined by the EDAT. In this way, we plan to identify and target the needs of potential long term ELLs (LTEs) and LTEs who have not made significant progress in the last two years. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We plan to utilize Pearson SuccessMaker Math & Literacy program to assess and provide personalized intervention to students through grade-specific Academic Intervention Services. This program provides adaptive instruction and real-time data to teachers. The program helps teachers decide where to begin instruction, determine when the student demonstrates learning, emphasize content appropriate to the student’s needs, clarify points when difficulties arise, remind the student of knowledge previously attained, and check the student’s recollection of previously mastered material. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT data has shown that our ELL students are performing lower in the writing section than any other modality. Out of the 114 ELL students currently on our roster, our Emerging ELLs are showing trends of performing higher in listening and reading than speaking and writing. We will continue to monitor these students for progress. Our Transitioning ELLs are showing need of support in writing and, in general, are performing higher in Speaking and Listening. The data also shows that the majority of our ELLs are currently identified as Transitioning. The data shows that the majority of these students are performing higher in Listening and Speaking and require additional support in Reading and Listening. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 3  School leaders and the ELL coordinator will review data from outcome assessments with a specific focus on ELL performance over time. We will share findings with new and returning staff during our whole staff, beginning-of-year PD. We will identify possible contributing causes (e.g., adjustments to curriculum, new strategies implemented as a result of PD/PLC) and ask teachers to reflect on implications for their practice for the 2017-2018 school year, as nearly all of our students are either former or current ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Delivery of ENL services is provided through a combination of Integrated and Stand-alone ENL classes in mathematics, science, and social studies. ELLs in free-standing ENL classes are provided with four or five periods of Stand alone, content-infused, ENL instruction in addition to three or four periods of ENL integrated services during English Language Arts (ELA) or Social Studies. ENL teachers support their content area co-teachers by helping to facilitate the infusion of vocabulary and comprehension skills, as well as incorporating ENL strategies into content instruction. During content area co-teaching periods, ENL educators teach processing and literacy skills in order to help make content comprehensible to ELLs. During the Stand-alone ENL periods of instruction, ENL teachers provide focused content and standard based instruction in the development of language and literacy. ENL teachers are incorporating programs procured through the ELLs Dual Language grant and other funding sources, into the ENL curriculum, specifically: , American Reading Company's ENIL, Mathletics, Continental Press Publications, and focused Dual Language Professional Development from New York State Department of Education's Department of English Language Learners and Student Support. Balanced Literacy within the workshop model provides the structure and grouping to facilitate instruction and practice in a small-group setting. Through teacher-student conferences, progress is analyzed, charted, and individualized. Instruction is data-driven; literacy connects the concepts. Services also include ENL support and differentiated instruction during the work period through the Writer’s Workshop during the designated literacy period. Assessing and conferring will result in progress made and instruction required. ENL strategies and classroom structures include daily source book writing, vocabulary building activities, leveled libraries, and the use of technology. In order to ensure that ELL students meet the Common Core State Standards, the ENL program is developed with each students specific goals and needs in mind. This approach targets a variety of language levels and affords smaller learning environments. Additional support will be provided through Title III Saturday program which is anticipated to begin in January 2018. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Q311 currently runs a Dual Language programs in accordance with CR Part 154 and Title III guidelines for general education English Language Learners (ELLs) in order to support the development of English proficiency and literacy in an academic context. Like the ENL program, this program also runs from September through June. Certified ENL teachers are delivering services. All ELLs in the Dual Language program receive, at a minimum, four periods of push-in (integrated) ENL services during English Language Arts, totaling 180 minutes per week. All ELLs at the Entering and Emerging levels of English proficiency receive an additional four periods (180 minutes) of pull-out ENL services per week. 4  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL services are provided through a combination of a Stand-alone, Co-teaching, and Integrated ENL classes in mathematics, science, and social studies. ELLs in Stand-alone ENL classes are provided with four periods of content-infused ENL instruction in addition to three or four periods of ENL push-in services during English Language Arts (ELA) or Social Studies and/or Math. In Dual Language certified ENL teachers are delivering services. All students at the Entering and Emerging levels of English proficiency receive the mandated eight periods (360 minutes) of ENL instruction a week in a stand alone model. In addition, although students at the Expanding level are required to receive four periods (180 minutes) of ENL instruction, our students are being over serviced with eight periods (360 minutes) of ENL instruction (three periods through the push-in model and five periods departmentalized). In addition, students in our Dual Language program are receiving four periods of (180 minutes) of HLA instruction per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In Stand-alone ENL, students receive all core content classes in English from their ENL pull-out teacher in a small group setting. All teachers provide home language support such as native language glossaries, iPads, scaffolded lesson trackers, as well as audio and visual support. Pull-out ENL teachers co-plan with content teachers to ensure that lessons include comprehensible input, visuals, lesson trackers (as needed) to allow students to reach both content AND language objectives. ENL teachers identify content-specific vocabulary and language structures as well as the specific skills that students need to master to be able to move forward in the content area. In Integrated ENL services, students receive all core content in English from their content teacher and ENL push-in teacher. Both the content teacher and the ENL teacher provide home language support such as native language glossaries, iPads, scaffolded lesson trackers, as well as audio and visual support. Push-in ENL teachers co-plan with content teachers to ensure that lessons include comprehensible input, visuals, and lesson trackers (as needed) to allow students to reach both content AND language objectives. ENL teachers identify content-specific vocabulary and language structures as well as the specific skills that students need to master to be able to move forward in the content area. In Dual Language, students receive Social Studies and Science in English and Spanish. The target language alternates by day of the week. The instructional approach across our bilingual program is grounded in the belief that students learn best when they are actively engaged in meaningful learning. Our Ells are constantly challenged to think critically about Social Studies and Science topics in both languages and to transfer knowledge from one language to another to develop their understanding even further. In addition, students are assessed on an on-going basis to allow teachers to modify lessons and curriculum to meet the specific needs of their students i.e. incorporating visuals, technology, real-world connections and the like. This approach makes input comprehensible for our ELLs through multiple pathways of learning. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Q311 administers the ELE exam to students in the Dual Language program. Teachers and administrators use then use the information from the ELE to identify those students who need extra help in making progress in Spanish home language arts. ELE results are used for student placement in the appropriate level of Spanish home language arts instruction. Teachers and administrators at Q311 use ELE results to improve their instruction. In addition, For the first time this year NLA teachers are using American Reading Company's ENIL: Evalucion de nivel de lectura independiente to identify students independent reading level. A benchmark is completed in September and students are retested at the end of the year. This test allows teachers to identify those students who need additional support during independent reading as well as ensuring that students are provided with books at their level to ensure comprehension and the continued development of their reading skills. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 5  SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) Screening for LEP/ELL SIFE takes place at the point of entry to NYC DOE schools. First, a certified pedagogue administers the Home Language Idenfitication Survey which includes questions pertaining to the student's academic history. During this meeting, the parent's responses help determine whether the student is a potential SIFE. If the HLIS indicates that the student's home language is other than English, then an informal individual interview is administered to determine whether the student speaks or understands a language other than English. Based on this interview, students are administered the NYSITELL. If the student is a potential SIFE, qualified personnel administer the SIFE Oral Interview Questionnaire. Based on these results, the student is administered the Multilingual SIFE Screener (MLS) in the home language. If the MLS indicates that the student is a SIFE, we will administer the writing screener to determine the student's basic writing skills in his or her primary or home language. b) As is with all students, parental involvement and communication is key to student success. For newcomer students a strong home-to-school connection is critical due to the fact that they are not only navigating a new school system but an entirely new culture simultaneously. Therefore, MSQ311 has designed an instructional program for this population that focuses on creating a solid home-to-to-school relationship while simultaneously holding students to high expectations. Our newcomer ELLs are supported through the use of scaffolding, differentiation and countless other ESL strategies. However, they are expected to improve and show progress as all CASA students are. In our classrooms, students are grouped based on quantitative data collected from content specific pre-assessments. Newcomer Ells are provided with pre-assessments in their native language to assess their content knowledge versus their language ability in the content area. During the work period, tiered activities are used on an on-going basis to target the varied language proficiency needs of each student. In addition, Saturday ELL program is offered to students. Lessons during these sessions are designed with the needs of all our ELLs in mind therefore the necessary scaffolding and differentiation is included for our newcomer ELLs. In addition, modified texts and native language support (i.e. bilingual glossaries) are provided when necessary in all content areas. c) The instructional plan for these students has high expectations at its core. These students will continue to receive the ESL infused instruction that is differentiated and scaffolded to their level while allowing for high expectations. This population of students as with all MSQ311 students are expected to perform at age and grade level. With high expectations comes meaningful grouping, data driven instruction and meaningful content that will tap into each students needs and interests. In addition, this population will benefit from AIS programs and ELL Saturday program to further support their language learning. d) The instructional plan for these students addresses their specific needs as long-term ELLs. At MSQ311 our goal is to move these students to language proficiency by providing them with data driven individualized instruction in the form of AIS services, ELL Saturday program and small group instruction. In the classroom, instruction about grammatical forms and structures will be embedded in meaningful activities. ESL instruction will integrate literacy with academic content. Teachers will continue to draw on students' cultural and linguistic backgrounds and life experiences to aid in connections made between this population and the areas of study. These connections will motivate students toward their language learning goals. e) The instructional plan for these students include the mandated 90 minutes of integrated ENL services up to two years after exiting ELL status, as per CR Part 154.2, ELL accommodations, AIS services and the option of taking part in our Saturday ELL program. They will also be invited to partake in any of the activities offered to ELLs. Monitoring of their progress and providing the monolingual teachers with support through professional development opportunities will also help these students as they continue learning English in a supportive environment. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Q311 is currently using 6th, 7th and 8th grade specific texts for Social Studies, Science, and Mathematics. Texts are provided in Spanish for Newcomer students and/or students currently in our Dual Language Program. The instructional team supplements these texts with modified versions or excerpts on an as needed basis. In addition, English language use is adapted to meet the 6  students' level of proficiency. Incorporating strategies such as having students restate complex sentences as a sequence of simple sentences; explaining the use of idiomatic expressions; providing explicit explanations of key words and special or technical vocabulary; using demonstrations or role playing to illustrate a concept; allowing time for students to discuss what they learn and to generate questions in areas that require clarification; and providing explanations for the language used in the classroom. Teachers allow students to share their explanations and/or thinking before writing them down on paper. These strategies allow the content to become comprehensible input. Technology is also being incorporated as part of our curricula. Programs such as Khan Academy, NewsELA, and ThinkCERCA are infused into the curriculum, providing students with an opportunity to practice skills and ideas thereby reinforcing the learning that is going on during instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Classroom instruction and content curriculum are differentiated to meet the individual needs of all students, including ELLs and SWDs, as evidenced by lesson plans, curriculum materials, and leveled libraries. As a school growing to capacity our instructional vision ensures that all students with disabilities are placed in the least restrictive environment. At present, there are ICT and SETSS services at each grade level along with an Alternate Placement Paraprofessional at the sixth grade level for native language support. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. As part of our Academic Intervention Services (AIS) program, we utilize Pearson SuccessMaker Math & Literacy program. SuccessMaker is an English language intervention that we are implementing this year with ELLs who were held over and ELLs who are struggling to meet grade-level literacy and math standards. This program allows us to assess and provide personalized intervention to students through grade-specific Academic Intervention Services. This program provides adaptive instruction and real-time data to teachers. The program helps teachers decide where to begin instruction, determine when the student demonstrates learning, emphasize content appropriate to the student’s needs, clarify points when difficulties arise, remind the student of knowledge previously attained, and check the student’s recollection of previously mastered material. Language of instruction for this intervention program is English. However, home language support is provided as needed. ThinkCERCA is a scaffolded online reading and writing platform which is being utilized in ICT classes on each grade. The program includes overarching questions, leveled authentic texts, extensive writing scaffolds, embedded assessments, and a final performance task for each unit of study. ThinkCERCA is being used in ICT classrooms to provide students with additional language and content support. Language of instruction for this intervention program is English. However, home language support is provided as needed. School-wide, teachers deliver instruction in all content areas (ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies) utilizing ENL strategies, as well as provide students with the individualized differentiated instruction and scaffolding strategies. Across classrooms, differentiation and scaffolds are provided for groups and individual students. This is being carried out at all ELL language levels through the use of computer-based programs and/or interventions such as Khan Academy and NewsELA. Language of instruction for this intervention program is English. However, home language support is provided as needed. During our stand-alone ENL services, we utilize Everyday English, a cross-curricular program that features content taught through everyday scenarios. It features a multisensory approach to learning English and an emphasis on daily, peer-to-peer speaking practice. Teachers lead daily instruction on reading and writing in English and utilize embedded assessments to measure student growth and understanding. Language of instruction for this intervention program is English. However, home language support is provided as needed. In addition, ELLs receive focused intervention during Title III Saturday Academy through the use of Playbook's Reader's Theatre. This program allows students to put into practice all the knowledge that they are learning during direction instruction through incorporation of the four modalities of reading, writing, listening and speaking. This program is especially beneficial for newcomer ELLs as it allows them a safe space to practice their English and to hear English language models in their 7  classmates that will aid in their pronunciation. Native Language support is infused through all content areas as needed. As evidenced, by the use of word banks, glossaries, native language texts, and bilingual language translation. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? During the 2016-2017 school year, Q311 piloted ThinkCERCA, a literacy program which has an online reading and writing platform, in ICT classes across the school, all of which served ELLs and former ELLs. This program provides students with scaffolded close reading and argumentative writing lessons with multiple opportunities for formative and summative assessment. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Q311 provides students with a morning athletic program in conjunction with CHAMPS that is open to all students. In addition, we have a Community Based Organization (CBO) after school program run by the Child Center of New York that provides all students including ELLs, with a wide array of after school activities as well as academic support. The notices about the programs were published in various languages to meet the needs of our ELL population. After school clubs run Wednesday through Friday from November through June. A wide array of clubs are available to both ELLs and non-ELLs, including but not limited to Newcomers Club (for newcomer ELLs), Peer Tutoring, Web Design, Broadway Junior, Science Olympiad, and Volleyball. These clubs provide an opportunity for ELLs and non-ELLs to extend their learning in a more social atmosphere and encounter real life situations where they can practice what they learn within the classroom. Title III Saturday Academy runs at Q311 from late January to mid-May 2018. The program incorporates a reader's theatre program through which students practice reading, writing, speaking and listening as well as Khan Academy for Mathematics. Weekly, ELLs receive focused intervention during through the use of Playbook's Reader's Theatre. The program allows students to put into practice all the knowledge that they are learning during direction instruction through incorporation of the four modalities of reading, writing, listening and speaking. This program is especially beneficial for newcomer ELLs as it allows them a safe space to practice their English and to hear English language models in their classmates that will aid in their pronunciation. Native Language support is infused through all content areas as needed. As evidenced, by the use of word banks, glossaries, native language texts, and bilingual language translation. The program will culminate with a performance of a play selected by the students. Families of participating students will be invited to celebrate student achievement. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We are currently using supplemental computer-based programs in the content areas; specifically ELA, Social Studies, Mathematics, and Science. In addition, they are being utilized during intervention periods. Some of these programs provide language support and scaffolding for ELLs. In cases where the program does not embed ENL support the classroom teacher is providing language support on an ongoing basis to ELLs. This is achieved by providing texts in the native language as necessary. In order to meet the testing modifications requirements we also provide each ELL with a pocket size word to word translation dictionary in their native language and photocopies of bilingual glossaries in the available languages in math, science, and social studies. It is crucial that the students use these dictionaries and glossaries everyday so that this tool becomes part of their routine and they will be comfortable using it on the New York State assessments such as ELA, math, & science. During instructional periods students are encouraged to use regular bilingual dictionaries in conjunction with these translation dictionaries. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is essential to the English language learning process. For ELLs to be successful the most efficient and effective method of instruction is infused with native language support. At MS Q311, we have designed an ENL program that has native language support at its core. We have made it a priority to ensure that texts are available in student's native language, so that they may transfer the skills that they have in their native language to their English language learning. We 8  know it is important to use the skills that students already have to fortify their language learning. These pedagogical practices are infused throughout all our language learning classrooms (Dual and ENL). 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. At Q311 we understand the importance for scaffolding up to student learning. As middle schools students, our population requires certain support and services and this does not change in any way for ELLs. The only aspect that changes is that we have to design different paths of getting to the same goal. We strongly believe in the use of scaffolding to utilize age and grade level materials. In our classrooms, this is achieved through the use of supplemental materials, glossaries, dictionaries, technology and student-to-student interaction and collaboration. These paths will allow our ELLs to meet the same goals as their English dominant counterparts. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Q311 is currently co-located with the Riverview School, a District 75 school for students with autism. Q311 coordinates efforts to ensure that all ELLs' needs are met in several important ways. A number of our students participate in a "Reading Buddies" program in which Q311 students read aloud to Riverview students (some of whom are ELLs). In addition, we have invited Riverview staff and students to take part in several of our cultural events such as a Skype chat with students in the hometown of our campus namesake (Gabriela Mistral) and arts performances. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Every year Q311 schedules an Open House in June for incoming families who will join our school community in September. During this event incoming ELLs and their families are well informed about the different programs provided by our school. In addition, all ELLs, despite enrollment date, receive on going guidance by their homeroom teachers, our guidance counselor, ELL Coordinator and additional instructional staff as needed. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Begin the school year 2015-2016 we began to offer Spanish as a foreign language to our non-dual language 8th grade students. In addition, 6th graders can select from an arts, drama, technology, music, or Latin American culture elective. This elective rotates three times during the school year so that each student is exposed to a variety of electives. In the 7th grade, students begin the year in either an art or music elective and rotate mid-year. In the 8th grade, students choose either art or music and focus on that elective for the entire school year. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a) Q311 is following the 50-50 Dual Language Program. The instruction day varies by grade level. One teacher provides instruction in both English and Spanish alternated by day. The school's weekly instruction begins in English and alternates each day of the week. Currently, we are a zoned school. We do not have one designated Dual Language feeder school. Our students register based on address therefore at the school's Open House in June, and incoming families receive a Dual Language Survey to identifying students that would like to be part of our program. In addition, student interviews are conducted by the ELL Coordinator to gauge each students target language ability. b) Currently Science and Social Studies are taught in Spanish/English. 9  c) Languages (Spanish/English) are separated for instruction by class period. We have either 45 or 90 minute block periods. d) Since students are receiving HLA as part of their Dual Language Instruction, emergent literacy in the child's native language is provided as needed based on teacher created assessments, ELE results and ENIL assessment. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In order to establish high quality level of instruction, ongoing professional development on ELL strategies and methodologies and research-based best practices are being offered through staff development sessions, faculty meetings, one-on-one teacher conferences, and pull-out PD with follow-up coaching. Staff Development sessions are facilitated by the principal, assistant principal, teachers, coaches, ELL coordinator, city and Queens North Field Support Center (QNFSC) ELL experts, and outside providers such as ThinkCERCA. Topics to be covered over the course of this school year include curriculum alignment to the CCLS, differentiating instruction, analyzing student work, promoting vocabulary and grammar learning in context, increasing accountable talk, and teaching ENL through authentic literature, etc. In order to establish high quality level of instruction, ongoing professional development on ELL strategies and methodologies and research-based best practices are being offered through staff development sessions, faculty meetings, one-on-one teacher conferences, and pull-out PD with follow-up coaching. Staff Development sessions are facilitated by the school administrators, teachers, coaches, ELL coordinator, city and BFSC ELL experts, and outside providers such Achievement Series, Smart Science, Mathletics & the Center for Integrated Teacher Education (CITE). Topics to be covered over the course of this school year include curriculum alignment to the CCLS, differentiating instruction, analyzing student work, promoting vocabulary and grammar learning in context, increasing accountable talk, and teaching ESL through authentic literature, etc. Through the various opportunities for professional development teachers will provide the tools, scaffolding and structure for student learning. They will incorporate a variety of teaching methods to respond to the multiple ways that students approach learning in order to help children progress at their own pace. This involves making decisions on which strategies to use, when and with whom to use them, and the rationale for implementing the practice based on student data. With input the entire instructional team, administrative staff will assess the professional development needs, then plan and coordinate meaningful and relevant workshops / coaching sessions that make connections between theory and best practices based on scientific research. Professional development will take place both in-house and within our new network structure to help teachers hone their skills in targeting their students' language needs and in developing the activities and practices to provide our students with the necessary tools to develop language proficiency. The required minimum 7.5 hours of ELL training to all staff will be conducted during common planning periods, and our three school-wide conference days. Teachers cycle through ELL professional development workshops of a half hour, an hour, and an hour and thirty minutes in duration, respectively, during the opening Chancellor’s Conference Day, Election Day, and Chancellor’s Conference Day in June. Professional development sessions, regardless of their format, will continue to provide ENL teachers with the support system they need to effectively plan lessons so that our students will achieve linguistic and academic success. Through the various opportunities for professional development teachers will provide the tools, scaffolding and structure for student learning. They will incorporate a variety of teaching methods to respond to the multiple ways that students approach learning in order to help children progress at their own pace. This involves making decisions on which strategies to use, when and with whom to use them, and the rationale for implementing the practice based on student data. With input from the entire instructional team, administrative staff will assess the professional development needs, then plan and coordinate 0  meaningful and relevant workshops / coaching sessions that make connections between theory and best practices based on scientific research. Professional development will take place both in-house and within the district and FSC structures to help teachers hone their skills in targeting their students' language needs and in developing the activities and practices to provide our students with the necessary tools to develop language proficiency. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional development workshops that focus specifically on language acquisition and development provide teachers with knowledge of the various degrees of language acquisition and the ever-changing needs of students as they progress in language development. The required minimum 7.5 hours of ELL training to all staff will be conducted during common planning periods, and our three school-wide conference days. Teachers cycle through ELL professional development workshops of a half hour, an hour, and an hour and thirty minutes in duration, respectively, during the opening Chancellor’s Conference Day, Election Day, and Chancellor’s Conference Day in June. Professional development sessions regardless of their format will continue to provide ENL teachers with the support system they need to effectively plan lessons so that our students will achieve linguistic and academic success. Agendas for all meetings are kept on file in individual employee files and school wide Professional Development Binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Since our students are largely ELLs or former ELLs this particular population is very active in our school community. We have a Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) and meetings occur monthly. Our school's Parent Coordinator is communicating with parents regularly about their needs and/or concerns and bringing those to the PTA meetings. Q311 and its teachers are developing ways of utilizing our ELL parent population and everything they have to offer in our classrooms. The goal is to continue to foster the home-to-school connection through parental involvement. Q311 is fortunate to be able to provide opportunities for parental involvement that are open to all parents. All parents are offered training sessions about specific school-wide technology programs currently in use such as, Engrade. During Back to School night, parents received information on the use of Engrade and how it can help foster communication between parents, students and teachers. Ms. Jeannette Goldfarb, guidance counselor, provides ELL parents with a workshop in their native language that conveys the importance of monitoring Engrade regularly to follow their child's academic progress. The ELL coordinator, Parent Coordinator and the instructional staff communicate with parents and the PTA to assess needs. The PTA administers formal and informal surveys to identify specific school community needs. In addition, they plan for guest speakers at monthly PTA meetings to help families with topics of interest (i.e. immigration, financial advice, etc.). Translation services are available at all school events by school staff. All notices home are translated. This year we are continuing our Parent-Teacher Teams whereby parents work side-by-side with teachers for multiple sessions of 1 hour and twenty minutes in length. Teams work together to develop student-specific strategies that parents can use to help their children at home. Families invited to take part in the teams are carefully selected based on student need identified through a combination of state ELA and Math results, grade team teacher feedback, in-house assessments (i.e. performance series) and ongoing formal and informal classroom assessments (e.g., pre and post tests, Performance Tasks, Midpoint assessments). 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Title III Meeting - January 2018 ELL Parent Symposium (including ELL parent conferences) - March-April 2018 1  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Beth Hert, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Corona Arts & Sciences Academy School DBN: 24Q311 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Beth Hert Title Principal Amanda Gardner Assistant Principal Maria Hernandez Parent Coordinator Melida A. Barbosa ENL/Bilingual Teacher Veronica Amador Parent N/A N/A N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Jacqueline Burgos School Counselor N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD N/A N/A N/A N/A TBD N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: Q311 School Name: Corona Arts and Sciences Academy Superintendent: Madelene Chan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Emelyn Amanda Fernandez Gardner Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal No No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. According to our most recent Home Language Report (RHLA), our students’ home languages are broken down as follow: 84% Spanish, 15% English, 0.8% Chinese or Mandarin, <1% Bengali, <1% Haitian Creole. Currently we have several staff members that assist in translations of in-house documents into Spanish. Since our largest non-English speaking population come from Spanish-speaking households, we are able to ensure that language support is provided as needed. For lower-incidence languages, we utilize the Department of Education's document translation services to ensure communication with families. Documents such as the Discipline Code, ELL entitlement letters, and Title I and Title III entitlement letters among others are obtained directly from NYC DOE Info Hub or the Translation & Interpretation Unit and provided in parents' preferred language. Announcement and notification phone calls are made using the school-wide system (School Messenger) in English, Spanish, and Chinese. Students are provided with written or oral translations for all state exams as needed. In addition, we 5  monitor Blue Cards, Parent Surveys, and the ATS report of Preferred Language (RCPL) to ensure that parents continue to receive timely information and notifications in the language that they prefer. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Chinese (Any) Mandarin Bengali N/A 854 154 9 0 1 N/A 83.81% 15.11% 0.88% N/A 0.1% N/A 864 143 8 1 1 N/A 84.79% 14.03% 0.79% 0.1% 0.1% N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? School event flyers, student-led conference notices, SLT/PTA notices, parent newsletters, Parent-Teacher Team flyers, parent workshop schedules Notices from community organizations (Borough president, LaGuardia College) Report cards Families Ongoing (October 2018-June 2019) Bi-weekly November 2018 January 2019 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In-house translation (Translated by parent coordinator, ELL coordinator, teacher, or school aide) In-house translation (parent coordinator) In-house 6  March 2019 June 2019 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Back to School Night September 2018 In-house (Spanish-speaking staff) School Leadership Team (SLT) and Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) meetings Student-led conferences and PBL Expo Night Ongoing (Sept. 2018-June 2019) In-house November 27, 2018 March 6, 2019 May 16, 2019 In-house and DOE vendor (thebigword) 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, parents are first notified via School Messenger, our phone blast system. The school leader (principal or assistant principal) will communicate a message to our parent coordinator or a school aide who will in turn create and send the message to families using School Messenger. In addition, the school leader will provide written communication to families notifying them of the situation, which will be translated in-house and sent home with students immediately. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff members will be made aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 on Staff Development Day in September 2018. At this time, they will also be informed or reminded of the various resources that will be offered and utilized when communicating with families, including but not limited to in-house translation and interpretation, over-the-phone interpretation, and translated documents available on the NYC DOE website. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 7  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) -Our school provides each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who requires language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities, which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. -In our main office and school lobby, we post a sign in each of the covered languages or most prominent languages indicating the availability of interpretation services. -Our School Safety Plan contains procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school's administrative offices solely due to language barriers (i.e., in-house interpretation services are provided). -We will utilize the DOE’s over-the-phone interpretation line (1-855-249-9103 or 1-877-231-0288) to facilitate communication with parents who speak lower-incidence languages (Arabic, Bengali, Chinese). Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Q311 utilizes the Department of Education's Learning Environment Parent Survey to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services provided by our school. In addition, our open door policy allows for ongoing communication between school and home to ensure that parents and families are receiving the services they desire. 8 
