 26Q315 School Name: BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY EARLY COLLEGE HIGH SCHOOL (P-TECH) Principal: PATRICE HENRY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Business Technology Early College High School 342600011315 9 - 14 School Number (DBN): 26Q315 230-17 Hillside Ave., 3 rd Fl., Queens, NY 11427 718.217.3613 718.217.2614 Phone Number: Fax: Patrice Henry phenry@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Patrice Henry Susan Friedenburg Edith Young Rasheed Bility Louise Galloway MatheyaParker TolleifaBent QCC Affinity Schools CUNY/UA Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Fred Walsh Superintendent: 333 7 th Ave. Rm. 715, NY, NY 10001 fwalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212 356-3754 Phone Number: 718.217.2614 Fax:   Field Support Center (FSC) Affinity Schools CUNY/UA FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Room 606 aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718.935.5618 Phone Number: 718.935.5618 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Patrice Henry Susan Friedenburg Edith Young Brittney Russell MatheyaParker TolleifaBent *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/PTA   Name JoselynGreene Andrea Rupansingh Kerline Roman DanielDesousa Kealia Hamilton AliceMcGowan Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/PTA Member/PTA Member/Parent Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Business Technology Early College High School ( BTECH) is an innovative 9-14 early college high school with CTE pathways in business and information technology. Our mission is to prepare students to become leaders of tomorrow and to successfully compete in a digital and global economy. Students engage in a rigorous academic program and through our dual enrollment program with our college partner, Queensborough Community College (QCC), they will earn an Applied Associates in Computer Information Systems or Information & Internet Technology. Through our industry partner with SAP, a global enterprise software company, along with other partner companies our students will gain hands-on career development experiences including job shadowing, mentoring and career readiness skills.   The BTECH graduate will possess deep conceptual knowledge, technical and communication skills, industry certifications and workplace experience that will prepare them for post-secondary education and the workforce. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Business Technology Early College High School is an Early College (ECI) and Career and Technical Education (CTE) program, serving students in grades 9-14. The program is a six- year sequence that offers a dual enrollment program, AP courses as well as work-place experiences that prepare students for careers in business and STEM pathways. Students will earn a high school diploma and an Applied Associate degree free of cost in Information & Internet Technology and Information Systems from Queensborough Community College upon completion of the six year sequence. Our students also receive career readiness opportunities through our strong partnership with SAP (a global enterprise software development company). We are one of four programs in the Northeast that the global company has partnered with to support of our mission of preparing students to competitively engage in STEM careers. Demographics and Academic Program We are entering our fifth year and serve a diverse population of 522 students with 67% of our population constituting of boys and 33% girls. We have 14% of our students that are students with disabilities and 5% are English as a New Language Learners. We can consistently engaged in ensuring successful outcomes for all students and will utilize the ICT model to promote high achievement of our special education population. We have seen successful outcomes in student enrollment and performance in college courses with students taking the Advanced Math sequence that included 11 juniors taking College Algebra and Trigonometry in the Fall of 2017, 8 seniors taking Calculus I in the Fall of 2017 and 8 juniors taking Pre-calculus in the Spring of 2018 at the QCC campus. This year, we will continue with our 8 rising seniors to take Calculus I in the Fall of 2018 and our rising juniors to take Advanced Math in the Spring of 2018. We had 56% of students meet the CUNY benchmark for literacy and 45% of students meet the CUNY benchmark in Algebra and 46% demonstrate CUNY benchmark in Trigonometry in 2017-2018. We had 35 seniors attend QCC in 2017-2018 and 33 of them received all credits at QCC, including coursework in either Astronomy, Geology or Nanochemistry; English Composition; MA321 or MA114; Macroeconomics; and two courses in their selected major. Additionally, 37 juniors attended QCC and 35 received a 'C' or higher in English Composition at Queensborough Community College. Our tenth graders took their first college course, Speech 211, in the Spring of 2018 and 96% of those who attended were successful in completing their course. This year, 2018-19, we will have our first round of Year 5 students, that includes 50 of our graduating class who are continuing with the BTECH/QCC program, out of which 32 may be eligible to graduate with their Applied Associates in May 2019. Our seniors will take a full course load of college courses including: PLSC Government, Macroeconomics, CIS 101 or ET710, and MA 321 (Technical Math) or MA 114 (College Algebra/Trigonometry). Our juniors will take coursework in English Composition 101 and 102 and their first introductory course in both CIS and IIT. We will continue to offer AP courses this fall in AP English Literature, A.P Environment and AP Computer Science to increase rigorous expectations and provide college access to students in the high school scope and sequence. Our CTE program will incorporate classes within the Computer Science for All program that will provide students with opportunities to gain industry certifications upon completion of coursework. College Readiness Our vision is to ensure that all students are enrolled in college or have a viable a post-secondary pathway. To promote our college going culture we are partnered with QCC as well as College Access for All and the CUNY College Advising Corps. In partnership with QCC, our faculty and staff collaborate to discuss the essential skills and content knowledge students need to successfully enter these college courses using a framework called Indicators of Student Readiness (ISRs) two semesters before students are scheduled to take the course. Our high school teachers integrate these skills 0  into their curriculum throughout the semester to increase student’s readiness and monitor students progress towards these indicators. This year, we will continue to offer a College Readiness Seminar course that emphasizes college level writing and communication skills that students need to be successful in college. We will promote self reflection, self advocacy and active engagement through our new application process for students interested in taking college courses. Students also have opportunities during the summer to participate in college coursework to provide enrichment opportunities for our students. Partnerships Collaboration and Equity We will participate in the interschool collaboration, Learning Partners, to expand our learning community and engage in collaborative inquiry through a racial equity lens. In addition, our school organizational structure promotes collaboration to increase successful outcomes in their courses. Teachers will meet in grade and content teams with a focus on designing coherent instruction that meets the needs of all students and looking at student work to improve instructional practices. Students will participate in goal setting and reflection and present their progress to these goals at Student- Led Conferences. This year, we will facilitate a student led IEP conference in collaboration with INCLUDE NYC, a not-for-profit organization that promotes self-advocacy of special education students at high school and colleges and an ICT team will participate on the ICT Lab Site Program to strengthen our practices of providing rigorous instruction in an ICT classroom. We will also offer academic interventions and enrichment opportunities before and after school and increase credit accumulation through the work of our teacher teams and our Achieve Now Academy . Social Emotional Learning To increase outcomes for students, we are committed to providing a supportive learning environment with collaborative teachers. We have infused an advisory program to support students' academic and social behaviors and promote their SEL competencies. Our goal is to not only prepare them to handle academic press, but to empower our students to embody the core values and principles that BTECH was founded on: Collaboration, Resilience, Advocacy, Focus and Tenacity. We are in the third year of a Pilot Program focused on strengthening our communities' social and emotional intelligence and responsiveness. We received an SEL grant from Urban Assembly Resilient Scholars Program and a Restorative Justice Grant that will also support our program. We engaged in over 30 restorative practices and have set goals to engage our community in school-wide practices and expectations to promote a successful culture of respect and success. We have seen an increase in mediation and restorative practices, and will look to engage students in leading and participating as peer mediators and mentors in this academic year. Students will serve as ambassadors to mentor incoming students. We will also motivate leaders of tomorrow with Youth Leadership Council members representing us at the district level. Our program continues to strengthen our supportive environment and strong family ties through coordinating events like: Cruising towards Graduation an Early College Production, Give Backs, BTECH Talks, Innovator’s Con, BTECH Barbeque Bash, Community Days, Passion classes, Family Night events and Parent Learning Walks for members of our school community. Preparing students for the world of work Our mission, in partnership with NYCDOE, ECI, QCC and SAP, our industry partner, is to provide an education that better prepares our students for jobs of the future. This year, we will have our first cohort of Seniors who will participate in an internship program at the SAP office in Manhattan in the summer as well as a Bloomberg Philanthropies pilot program pairing teenagers with business professionals. Students will gain job experience in the industry of Technology. We will also coordinate other hands-on career development activities through our Industry Liaison and a work based learning coordinator. Students will work on technical writing in the CTE Business Technology courses and our College Readiness seminar. Students have opportunities to participate in Innovative Challenges, Leaders who Lunch Session, our school-based internship program and a myriad of professional skill development opportunities to prepare them for the world of work. BTECH's Corporate office, a simulation of a business within a school, provides students with work experiences and tech based learning at the school to prepare them for external internships and employment. Students who join the co-op program will be placed in a department of interest, led by a student leader. Team leaders will serve as peer mentors and students have opportunities to transition into external internships as they demonstrate career readiness skills and competencies. 1  Powerful Partnerships Lastly, we see parents as partners and are committed to increasing our parent involvement for the 2018-2019 academic year. We will host Coffee and Conversations, Family Cafe with families quarterly and will coordinate celebrations and events with families like the Rising Star Awards and Honor Roll festivities to coincide with PTA events. We will provide parent newsletters, use School Messenger, Remind app, translation services, school website and increase our parent enrollment on our online gradebook system, Skedula. We will continue to work collaboratively with our parent body and leadership to ensure that all families receive communication in their home language through our increased use of language services and utilizing our ESL teacher who speaks several languages. We will also use our students to increase our social media footprint to keep families informed and engaged. Our Parent Coordinator with a strong background in technology to help us increase our use of technology to engage our families. BTECH will continue to work collaboratively to ensure that we provide a quality educational experience for our students that translates into successful college and career outcomes. We will invite families to volunteer at our school and invite them for learning and culture and climate walks as part of our village of support. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 14 % of our student population is Special education and 5 % is ENLs. Our students have learning and emotional challenges and we have six learning specialists who work collaboratively with general education teachers to provide differentiated strategies that support various learning needs of our student population. We also have a ESL coordinator who provides instructional support for our ENL students. Our special education population also need support in organization and developing life skills. Our Special education students and ENL students struggle with writing evidenced by our NYSELAT data and our English Regents exams and literacy-based exams. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As we enter our fifth year, we have identified these areas of progress and growth: Rigorous Instruction  We have made the most progress in our students demonstrated college readiness through successful completion of college readiness sequence and CUNY proficiency benchmarks. We had 56% of students meet the CUNY benchmark for literacy and 45% of students meet the CUNY benchmark in Algebra and 46% demonstrate CUNY benchmark in Trigonometry.  96% of our 10th graders who took their first college course, Speech 211, successfully completed their course. Supportive Environment  We are promoting a strong school culture and climate through our use of restorative practices and community circles and saw an increase in restorative circles and mediation and a decrease in suspensions by 52%  We increased the credit accumulation of our students through the support of teacher teams from 75% to 92%. We will continue to focus on: Collaborative Teachers 2   Ensuring that teachers share a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best and use this to inform how we design coherent instruction and build vertical alignment in our scope and sequence. ● Developing common assessments and grading practices across content areas and grades that support high expectations and student achievement. ● Providing opportunities for teachers to take on leadership roles and share in decision-making for instructional improvement, i.e. lead professional learning sessions, UFT Teacher Center, Teacher leadership, Book clubs, learning groups, Grade and Content Team Leads, Committees etc. We have established a learning by doing approach to improving instruction and our professional learning beginning with our Summer Institute of Curriculum Design is aligned to this. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q315 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 422 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A 1 6 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 1 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 67.3% % Reduced Lunch 4.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.7% 19.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 7.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.56 6% 31% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 31 31 89.5% 10.7% 14.5% 39.8% 27.3% 6.2% 2 13% 5.2 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. BTECH's Strengths in Rigorous Instruction In analyzing our school data, we identifying the following areas of strength in Rigorous Instruction: As an early college CTE high school, our students participate in dual enrollment courses at the college, this promotes high expectations and the scope and sequence reflects rigorous instruction. 1. BTECH received a rating of Proficient for indicator 1.2 (Pedagogy) in 2014-2015 and the following was noted: School leaders and faculty share a cogent set of beliefs on how students learn best informed by the Danielson's Framework for Teaching allowing multiple pedagogical approaches. Teaching practices and student ownership of work products varies across the school. 2. School Quality Guide 2017-2018 Rigorous Instruction and Academic Press 83% of students say that students agreed that they are learning a lot in their classes to prepare them for the next level or grade. 80% of students agreed or strongly agreed that their classes really make them think critically. School Quality Guide 2016-2017 Rigorous Instruction & Academic Press 3. 85% of students agreed that they are learning a lot in their classes to prepare them for the next level or grade. 4. 87% of teachers responded that a lot or all students in their classes feel challenged. 5. 75% of students agreed or strongly agreed that their classes really make them think critically. 6. Students will participate in AP courses in AP Computer Science, AP Literature, AP Environmental Science and college courses beginning in 10th grade. 7. 96% percent of our 11th graders successfully completed a college course at QCC. BTECH's Priority Needs in Rigorous Instruction Students participate in rigorous course work at the QCC college, however student perception in the School Quality survey data for 2017-2018 reflects inconsistencies in their high school courses of stud . 1. 55% of students agreed that teachers ask difficult questions in class. 2. 78% of teachers say that students feel challenged. 3. 54% of students responded that a lot or all students in their classes feel challenged. 5  4. We recognized that our mastery percentages on Regents exams in 2018 were less that 30 % in Earth Science, Common Core Algebra, Living Environment, Geometry and Chemistry. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will effectively increase the level of rigor across classes, as evidenced by a 5% increase in the average number of students demonstrating college readiness in ELA Regents and Math exams, from 42.5 to 47.5% . 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Cycles of Professional Learning: 1. We will engage in cycles of learning to develop a clear understanding of what rigor looks like using CCLS standards, Danielson Framework and Webb's DOK . 2. Our Cycles of learning will include professional learning, implementation of practice, feedback on practice, impact of practice on student performance. 3. Math Teachers participate in Algebra For All professional learning series and the CUNY Affinity Math Strategies PD. Unit Design: 1. All teachers will design two standards-based units of study aligned to CCLS and in ELA and Math classes, lesson reflect the instructional shifts. 2. An Educational Consultant from Redesign will work with the Curriculum 21 Design Team to support faculty in the design and implementation of the units of study they reflect our common understanding of rigorous instruction developed. 3. Content teams will meet weekly to develop their units of study and receive feedback from peers. Assessment: 1. Instructional support consultant will work with the ELA Department to develop skills for analyzing student assessment data from both Regents exams and in house assessments. Teachers will learn how to use data to make strategic decisions around adapting instruction to meet students’ needs both individually and in groups. The goal is to increase of assessment literacy and incorporate data-driven practices. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Core Faculty September 2018 -Professional learning team- Principal, Assistant Principal, Coaches, Teachers Core Content Area Teachers September 2018- June 2019 -Professional learning Team -Content Leads Core Content Area Teachers September 2018-June 2019 -Content Area teachers -S pecial Education teachers -ENL 7 Core Content Area Teachers/ September 2018-June 2019 -Content Area teachers special Education Teachers -Special Education teachers -ENL Team leads, AP September 2018-2019 Team leads, AP, Content teachers Content Teachers 2. We will increase the number of observations and peer intervisitations of classrooms to observe instructional practices that support student to student interaction, critical thinking questions, accountable talk, and providing meaningful actionable feedback Instructional Strategies: 1. We will develop pedagogy that promote research based teaching practices that foster higher order thinking and encourage student discussions are consistently seen at high levels across all classrooms 2. Differentiation strategies will be incorporated into each lesson and unit design including UDL framework to ensure that planning reflects the needs of our student population including of SWD and ENLs. Systems and Structures Distributive Leadership: 1. Team leaders and APs will participate in the CUNY Instructional Leadership Program and AP Collaborative to build their facilitative leadership capacity to lead professional learning communities through cycles of inquiry with a focus on our lowest third sub group. 2. Target Scholars Academy We will implement a Target Scholars Academy to support our lowest third and special education students to receive additional instruction to support them in demonstrating proficiency in CCLS standards. 3. Rigorous Course Sequence Implement an AP Environment Science, AP English Literature and an AP Computer Science class into our scope and sequence to increase rigor. 4. Afterschool Tutoring, CUNY Tutor Corps and Saturday Academy We will provide students with tutoring opportunities with faculty, assign a peer mentors and peer tutors and incorporate the CUNY Tutoring Corp into our Algebra classroom. 5. Data Driven Classrooms Integrate a school-wide assessment cycle to monitor academic progress of students in Regents courses. 6. Model Classrooms We will implement three model classrooms where teachers will open their classrooms as they engage in core practices that promote rigorous experiences for students. 7. Learning Partners Program We will engage in professional learning that includes 8 looking at how we develop culturally responsive curricula that supports the needs of our students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Vision: We see parents as powerful partners in our work of improving student outcomes through the design and implementation of rigorous instruction. We will utilize our grade team structure to ensure that we engage families in gaining an understanding of what rigorous instruction is and strategies to support their children. Strategies: 1. We will engage in instructional workshops that unpack the expectations of the CCLS and its accompanying assessments and engage in discourse about strategies for parents that support their child including how to use technology to provide instructional support. 2. We will facilitate parent learning walks each semester to engage parents in the learning activities students engage in, providing opportunities for them to learn alongside their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Fair Student Funding, the NYS P-TECH grant as well as the CUNY ECI budget will be used to support the needs for implementing this goal and evaluating the impact of this goal. Funding will be used for professional development in the hiring of Educational consultants to train instructional leadership team on essential elements of instruction, as well as all teachers. The instructional leadership team will also be sent to trainings with TLP program at the DOE as well as the CUNY instructional leads to support effective practices. Per session will be provided to content area teacher leaders to support their teams in developing and revising units and assessments and attendance to meetings with college faculty to develop indicators of students’ readiness and success as well as teachers of our tutoring, Target Scholars Academy and Saturday Academy programs. All teachers will be provided with instructional resources and materials to support their learning and we will have learning retreats to support this work. We also will purchase curricular materials including castle learning for targeted interventions, Datacation with IO Assessments, along with other software programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 9  By February 2019, all English and Math teachers will administer a Mock Regents to assess students progress and developing interventions based on the data and will see a 2% increase based on their 1st interim assessment score. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will monitor progress using interim assessments/Mock Exams that will be administered every 6-8 weeks. We will utilize: Student Progress Reports, Student Marking Period Grades, Student Failure Reports and Attendance trends in BTECH's Tutorial Program and Saturday Academy, Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? BTECH Strengths in Supportive Environment: Based on the incident report data, anecdotal records on school based learning management system (Skedula) and attendance data for FY 2017, strengths regarding establishing a culture of achievement and high expectations in creating a safe, supportive learning environment. 1. We saw a decrease in suspensions evidenced by our OORS report by 52% since our enrollment in the Restorative Justice Pilot Program. 2. We have established an adviser for each student who meets with students at least twice a month to monitor academics and social and emotional competencies of students. We will incorporate passion classes on Community Days where teachers can engage with students around a shared interest. 3. 84% feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria. 4. 97% of teachers say adults at their school teach students how to advocate for themselves. BTECH's Priority Needs in Supportive Environment: Based on perception data in our School Quality Guide ( 2017-2018)and Incident data in OORS we set a goal to establish a culture of respect and high expectations through shared school-wide expectations and restorative practices: 1. 89.6 % yearly attendance 2017-2018 89% yearly attendance 2016-2017 2. 33% chronically absent 2017-2018 34% chronically absent 2016-2017 3. 58% of students say that most students feel it is important to come to school everyday. 4. 62% of students say that teachers notice if they have trouble learning something. 5. 55% of students say that their teachers support them when they are upset. 6. 67% of students say that discipline is applied fairly in their school. 1  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will promote a safe, supportive and intellectually challenging learning environment that fosters the academic, social and personal growth of every student with the integration of restorative practices. This will result in, a 5% decrease in chronically absent students from 33% to 28%. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018 – June 2019 Guidance counselor, Attendance team, Restorative Justice Action Team, RJAT Coordinators, APs, parent coordinator, and teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Guidance counselor, attendance team, Culture and Climate Coordinators, APs, parent coordinator, and teachers Professional Learning 1. BTECH faculty and staff will engage in cycles of learning focused on relationship building, restorative practices and implementing SEL competencies in our classrooms. 2. Our Cycles of learning will include professional learning, implementation of practice, feedback on practice, impact of practice on student performance. Systems and Structures All All 1. Distributive Leadership The School's Culture and Climate team (Transformative Crew) will meet regularly to discuss strategies and core practices that support a strong school culture. They will receive coaching and support from attending Affinity Support trainings, Urban Assembly on site coaching. They will develop tools and strategies to turn-key to the entire community. 2. 9th Grade Advisory Implement a Resilient Scholars program in partnership with Urban Assembly for 9th grade advisory classes this builds the social emotional competencies of our freshmen. 3. Community Days Twice a month students meet in community advisories to engage in build relationships and their SEL competencies. 4. Student Leadership We will incorporate students as members of the Culture and Climate team who also serve on the Youth Justice League at the district level. We will also support the development of peer mentors, peer tutors, and Student Ambassadors to support our at risk and target scholars. 5. Attendance Team We will implement a attendance task force that meets biweekly to look at our attendance data and develop a strategic action plan to support students. We will each 3  adopt a student or work with the at risk students' current advisor to build a strong sense of community to increase the child's attendance. We will disaggregate the data to analyze the subgroups that students fall in and develop strategic plans to support them. Progress Monitoring System All We will analyze attendance data (bi-weekly), OORS data, teacher anecdotals and engage in school developed surveys to monitor progress towards our goals. September 2018-June 2019 Guidane counselor , attendance team, grade teams, culture and climate coordinators, and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Vision: We see parents as powerful partners in our work of improving student outcomes through the fostering a safe, supportive and intellectually challenging learning environment. We will utilize our teaming structure of the attendance and transformative team to provide learning opportunities for families to engage in our restorative practices including SEL. Strategies: 1. We will engage in instructional workshops that define restorative approaches to discipline as well as well as other practices of relationship building. Families receive opportunities to learn by doing in each workshop. 2. We will facilitate parent culture learning walks each semester to engage parents what restorative practices look like in action at BTECH. 3. We will also conduct workshops each semester for parents to support them in accessing our data tools like Skedula our online gradebook system where parents can monitor their children's attendance and academic performance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize the school budget for per session work by our Data Specialist to compile data for attendance and grade teams. We will also pay per session and substitute coverages for the meeting of Transformative Justice Crew and Attendance Task Force. We will also provide time for the attendance team to meet once a week to review target scholars including chronically absent students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 4  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, we will see a 2 percent decrease in the chronically absent students from 33 to 31 percent who are absent 5 or more times by the mid-year benchmark. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use weekly attendance data analysis, OORS data and perception data to assess progress to our goals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. BTECH's Strengths in Collaborative Teachers: The Danielson Rubric will be used to improve classroom instruction and assist students in making progress in all content areas. Collaboratively, teachers determine the common trends amongst student and specific population areas. Based on previous Quality Review (2014-2015) feedback and School Quality Survey ( 2016-2017), BTECH’s strengths and needs are the following: 1. Teacher teams engage in collaborative inquiry to improve classroom practice 4.99 (4.2) WD 2. 100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school teachers talk with one another about instruction. 3. 88% of teachers say that at their school teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels. BTECH's Priority Needs in Collaborative Teachers: 1. 75% of teachers agreed that a lot or all of the teachers at their school are actively trying to improve their teaching. 2. 88% of teachers agreed that a lot or all of the teachers at their school feel responsible that all students can learn. 3. Providing common assessments, rubrics and grading policies that are aligned with Common Core curricula and 21st century skills. 4. Based on student performance data the average pass rate on Regents is 54.6%. 5. Our student performance on CUNY Proficiency in Literacy is 40%. 6  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Collaborative Teachers By June 2019, effective collaboration on teacher teams will result in least a 5% increase in credit accumulation of our lowest third population from 77.5 percent to 82.5%. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Learning All August 2018 Principal, APs, teacher leaders 1. All teachers will engage in professional learning with an June 2019 emphasis on integrating strategies to support all learners including differentiation strategies 2. Grade team leads will participate in a 3 day workshop on building a strong professional learning community and gain resources for leading a team. 3. Grade team leads participate in the Instructional Leadership Program to strengthen their facilitative leadership Distributive Leadership Administrators/Teacher leaders will meet weekly to develop agenda and protocols for looking at student work to inform instructional decisions. Cycles of Inquiry Teacher teams meet weekly and engage in an inquiry cycle. They analyze student data and revise instruction based on evidence-based information gathered from looking at student work. Observations and Peer Intervisitations 1. Instructional support engage in classroom visits to give timely actionable feedback on how lessons are meeting the needs of all students with a focus and emphasis of our sub groups: lowest third, special education, black and hispanic males, ENL teachers 2. Teachers will engage in classroom intervisitations and instructional rounds with an emphasis on sharing practices that promote high student achievement for all students including differentiation and UDL strategies. AP and lead teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, APs, teacher leaders All All September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, APs, teacher leaders September 2018– June 2019 Principal, APs, teacher leaders 8  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will invite parents into teacher-student-parent meetings to address students progress through our student led conferences to discuss students' progress as well as outreach through our online gradebook platform and through our other communication media. Our parent coordinator will ensure that parents have their access codes to Skedula and will work to increase the number of parents enrolled on the system. Grade teams will also conduct outreach to parents to engage them. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources Needed: Instructional Resources ( books)   Datacation ( Data tool)/IO Asssessments  Baseline/Interim Assessments  Teacher Coverages/Per Session Activities  Professional Development Support Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, effective teacher collaboration will lead to improved student achievement, as evidenced by a 2% increase in credit accumulation of our lowest third from 77.5 percent to 79.5% for the Fall Semester. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data Monitoring Tools Scholarship Reports, Progress to graduation tracker, BTECH Tutorial/ Saturday Academy student attendance and performance data, January Regents results, College Enrollment data and credit accumulation tracker. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. BTECH's Strength in Effective School Leadership: 1. 100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals. ( 2017-2018 School Survey Data) 2. 97% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school.( 2017-2018 School Survey Data) 3. 97% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal sets high expectations for students to learn. BTECH's Priority Needs in Effective School Leadership: 1. We recognized that our mastery percentages on Regents exams in 2017 were less that 30 % in Earth Science, Common Core Algebra, Living Environment, U.S History, Geometry and Chemistry. 2. 88% of teacher agreed or strongly agreed that at their school, once they start a new program, they follow up to make sure that its working.( 2017-2018 School Survey Data) 3. 87% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal encourages feedback from parents/guardians and the community through regular meetings with parents/guardians and teacher leaders.( 2017-2018 School Survey Data) 4. 75% of teachers say that principal participates in instructional planning with teams and teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 0  By June 2019, school leaders' will develop and implement a targeted and differentiated professional learning plan, as evidenced by a 7% increase in average teacher effective ratings for Danielson Framework for Teaching component 3b and 3d from 78% to 85%. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Learning Staff Sep-June 1. All faculty will engage in cycles of learning about research based practices of using assessment in instruction and strategies that promote high order thinking through discussion and questioning. 5. Teachers will engage in professional learning that includes incorporating differentiation, ELL strategies and UDL strategies to help meet the needs of all students. Principal,AP, Teacher leadership team, coach Observations/Peer Intervisitations/Feedback Staff Sep-June Principal, APs and team leads will engage in informal visits using an observation cycle to provide targeted actionable feedback to teachers to improve teacher practice. Principal,AP, Teacher leadership team, coach Data Analysis Instructional leadership team will meet to discuss observation data to determine differentiated learning opportunities that is needed including: Model teacher classroom visits, inter-school visit, lesson study, instructional coaching 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Staff Sep-June Principal,AP, Teacher leadership team, coach 2  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will invite workshops for parents that unpack research based strategies we are integrating across classroom including: developing clear success criteria, and giving meaningful actionable feedback. We will provide parents will opportunities to engage in learning walks where they visit classrooms to see students engaged in effective classroom practices. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds will be used for coverages, per diem and planning time by grade teams, content teams, mentors and coaches. We have a data specialist who supports us in generating assessment data for all teachers. We will also utilize funds for per diem needs for school intervisitations by the instructional leads and based on observation data where teachers of teachers may need of additional support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the principal and her leadership team will analyze ADVANCE Data in (Domain 3) to determine the average performance rating increase from 78% to 80. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observations by principal, APs and coaches will be reviewed along with quarterly scholarship reports on students performances. Scholarship reports will be used in conjunction with MOTP observations to monitor progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. BTECH's Strengths in Strong Family and Community Ties: 1. 96% of families say that their school communicates with them in a language and a way that they can understand. 2. 83 % of parents/guardians responded positively to questions about how the school fosters strong family and community ties. ( 2017-2018) School Survey Data 2. 86 % of parents/guardians responded positively to questions about how the school fosters strong family and community ties. ( 2017-2018) School Survey Data 3. 93% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn. (2017-2018) School Survey Data 4. 94% of teachers say that teachers at this school understand families' problems and concerns. BTECH's Priority Needs in Strong Family and Community Ties: 1. 66 % of parents/guardians responded agreed or strongly agreed that they are invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction. 2017-2018) School Survey Data 2. 56 % of parents/guardians responded that since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school sometimes or often. (2017-2018) School Survey Data Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 4  By June 2019, Business Technology Early College High School will deepen meaningful opportunities for families to play an active role in the school community as evidenced by a 4% increase in positive responses on the School Learning Environment Survey to the question, “Parents/ Guardians were asked to volunteer time to support this school", from 56% to 60%. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grade teams will develop trips and opportunities for families to chaperone, and serve as partners in learning by facilitating school events to share their expertise and participate at school events. Parents and guardians September 2018 – June 2019 Parent coordinator and teachers Parent coordinator will generate an interest survey to gather data of activities parents would like to volunteer in support All September 2018 – June 2019 Parent coordinator and teachers Workshops for parents of students with IEPs and ENLs will be conducted each marking period to help parents keep pace with their children’s progress as well as present hints and tips on ways to support students at home with assignments. College liaisons will work with ISS team to develop action plan for families to use on college campus when advocating for services to aide students in their college courses. PTA outreach to families, selection of class parent to serve as link between school and families for individual class Parents and guardians September 2018– June 2019 Parent coordinator and teachers, college liaison and ISS team Monthly PTA meetings to include a focus topic with guest presenters relevant to parents, ie Skedula, college information sessions, etc Parents and guardians September 2018– June 2019 Teachers, staff and partners 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We will work collaboratively with our college partner, Affinity Group and CBOs like INCLUDENYC to engage families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 6  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School messenger, Remind App, School website license, parent outreach events, network group lead parent, translation services Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will improve our participation of parents in school events by 5% based on our total amount of parents who volunteered in 2017-2018 academic year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will monitor quarterly the number of families that are participating in school events and increase outreach based on data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) Classroom performance on summative assessments, scholarship report, baseline assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Small group instruction Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group tutoring IO Assessments data monitoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school, before school andafter school Mandatory tutoring Parent outreach Ongoing contact with parents and meetings Printed copies/ One-to-one meeting Castle learning aSaturCday School Regents Prep, BOT Academy, tutoring, after-school tutoring, Castle learning Teacher anecdotalsand outcome data Progress reports distributed to students and parents every six weeks Student referrals to guidance counselors Mathematics Classroom performance onsummativeassessments, scholarship report, baseline assessments Mandatory tutoring Ongoing contact with parents Teacheranecdotalsand outcome data Small group tutoring Saturdays, during school, after school 8 Small group tutoring During school, afterschool Saturday School Regents Prep, BOT Academy, tutoring, after-school tutoring, Castle learning Individual Counseling by guidance counselor Castle learning Small group and individual During the school day Science Social Studies Progress reports distributed to students and parents every six weeks Student referrals to guidance counselors Classroom performance onsummativeassessments, scholarship report, baseline assessments Mandatory tutoring Ongoing contact with parents Teacheranecdotalsand outcome data Progress reports distributed to students and parents every six weeks Student referrals to guidance counselors Classroom performance onsummativeassessments, scholarship report, baseline assessments Mandatory tutoring Ongoing contact with parents Teacheranecdotalsand outcome data Progress reports distributed to students and parents every six weeks Student referrals to guidance counselors 9  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Classroom performance onsummativeassessments, scholarship report, baseline assessments Individual Counseling by guidance counselor, Small group and individual During the school day Mandatory tutoring Ongoing contact with parents Teacheranecdotalsand outcome data Progress reports distributed to students and parents every six weeks Student referrals to guidance counselors 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Every effort is made to support new teachers and promote the appropriate professional growth required to teach dynamic, rigorous lessons. School-wide and differentiated professional development opportunities are provided to help teachers meet school goals, individual professional goals and work appropriately with all students. Strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments and support: - Administration will attend career fairs through the Department of Education and School Network to recruit Highly Qualified Teachers. -The school will continue the policy of hiring only teachers who meet the ESEA criteria for Highly Qualified Teachers. BEDS reporting will routinely be checked to make sure we have highly qualified staff.- Teachers will be given extensive professional development opportunities to develop their content knowledge and teaching pedagogy. Professional development will be offered in the school, along with offering opportunities outside of school. - First year teachers will be assigned a mentor to provide guidance in their work. - Teachers will be afforded mentor services even if they are not in their first year through our UFT Teacher Center Coach - The Danielson Framework will be used as a tool to observe teachers, give feedback and inform their instruction for the purposes of development. Teachers will meet with Administration to review observations, share feedback and develop action plans leading to measurable goals. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 3  Our commitment as a professional learning community is to be life-long learners focused on fostering a love of learning in our students. All teachers are provided with an instructional guide and staff handbook that reflects the instructional expectations for teachers at BTECH. In addition, teachers, discuss, evaluate, and analyze data across content area and create an action plan based on evidence-based data. Teacher engage in collaboration, peer observations and self-reflection as well as debriefing of best practices or problems of practice to improve students' instructional outcomes. The school program allocates time for daily and weekly team meetings for staff, as well as our professional learning time. Grade teams meet twice per week and focus on looking at student work and kid talk to improve outcomes for students . Content teams meet weekly and focus on collaboratively unit planning . The school program also makes time for weekly Instructional Cabinet to drive targeted professional development and inquiry around student data. This will support leadership development and coaching capacity for teams and teachers at BTECH. Our Science and Math Department attending national conferences to gain innovative practices and content knowledge on trends in their disciplines. Social Studies and English teachers attend Affinity group and CUNY professional development. The instructional leadership team attending professional development facilitated by Teaching Matters on leading professional learning teams. All staff engaged in a student led professional development on goal setting and improving our social and emotional intelligence. BTECH staffs a UFT Teacher Center where teachers receive professional development and support from a respected peer facilitator. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4  n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are involved in the decision making process via the UFT consultation committee, grade and content team meetings, Professional Learning Committee, Restorative Justice Committee and School Implementation committees that are scheduled to advise on progress of goals. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D and 5E Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 4,283,591 x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 5  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Business Technology Early College High School (BTECH), in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Business Technology Early College High School (BTECH) will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 7  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESEA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 8  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under theElementary and Secondary Education Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Orientations, Parent Learning Walks, workshops; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) Business Technology Early College High School (BTECH) , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 9  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by theElementary and Secondary Education Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 0  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary Education Act.Title I requirement for Elementary Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 1  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, students, faculty and property; 2  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name Business Technology Early College High S Borough Queens School Number 315 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Patrice Henry Coach Angela Olarte ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Kenneth Dornbaum Teacher/Subject Area Lisa Modafferi Teacher/Subject Area Derek Lee Related-Service Provider Lisa Barone/Speech Superintendent Fred Walsh Assistant Principal Melissa Manzo Coach N/A School Counselor Amy Perlmutter Parent Edith Young Parent Coordinator Britney Russell Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 500 4 Total number of ELLs 24 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.80%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 4 0 3 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Baselines examinations are given in Reading as well as Language Arts to all students on an annual basis. This data allows us to differentiate instruction based on reading level as well as English language proficiency. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have an ESL Coordinator who uses researched based strategies and resources to guide planning to meet the needs of ELLs and trains content area teachers in supporting our ELL population. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success for our Ells will be determined individually based on how well these students met AYP for ELLs on their state measures 5  in their academic core courses. We examine how our students perform on the NYSESLAT by looking at the RLAT report from ATS and compare yearly results to see if growth has occurred. We also will look at how students perform in all their core subjects to make a determination of success for our Ells. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We are incorporating an assessment calendar including interim assessments and teachers will create learning plans for individual and groups of students based on the summative data. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A. We are a high school 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use the RLAT to place students in classes/push in situations. We will use the RLAT to check yearly progress. We will also check the other Regents data, report card and progress report data to ensure that our students are progressing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our school meets in grade teams weekly and this will be on the agenda; so we will monitor our students closely and weekly Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. At BTECH we engage in the collaborative and push-in co-teaching model for instruction. The ENL teacher pushes in to various classes with the students and provides support to those students by working with the teacher in that class. b. The program model for all students consists of traveling as a grade block in heterogeneous groupings. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? a. The school program is a push-in model and students receive services to ensure that they receive their appropriate services 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 6  The program model is push-in coteaching so the ESL teacher works in conjunction with content area teachers to provide ELL. Graphic organizers, vocabulary sheets, modified text and dictionaries are used to help meet the demands of Common Core Learning Standards. Moreover, students use kindles to help them read as they use the read aloud feature to help with phonetics. All ELL's are provided with bilingual dictionaries. Our ELL students all speak different native languages (Dutch, Urdu, Punjabi and Bengali) and it is not possible with such a small population to provide NL support 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We do not offer a dual language program and each of our students speak a different native language--none of which are spoken by staff members 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. We will provide targeted support for our SIFE students b. The ELL population is a very small target population. This allows us to individualize instruction for each of our ELL student c. Lessons are differentiated to provided support to students at all levels of language acquisition. ELL student is provided with appropriate graphic organizers and is also given additional support through English Learning Lab. Student also has an ESL content area class in technology. d. Currently we have one long term ELL. This student has an IEP and receives both ESL services and support through ICT classes. e. The former ELL's are given extended time (as are current ELL's) on standardized tests and are given an additional ELL Learning Lab in which they receive three extra periods of ELA. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Special educators are present at curriculum development meetings and provide frequent input and differentiation to our SWDs, ELL or native speakers. Moreover, Curriculum units incorporate UDL considerations and teachers are trained in a variety of strategies so that there is flexibility in decision making at the classroom level to support ELL-SWDs in meeting their IEP goals and attaining English proficiency. Currently, we are working on more efficient and effective conferring strategies in order to support the teachers in supporting their students individual goals.Within the classroom, students are grouped regularly based upon student instructional needs, often times the groups contain a mix of general education students, ELLs, and SWDs 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We increase the number of periods that students receive ELA instruction and utilize programs like Read 180 to promote English proficiency. The intent of this is to help our students meet and/or exceed the Common Core Learning Standards assigned to their respective grades. Moreover, classroom teachers (push-in ESL and General Education) work closely with the Administrative and Instructional Teams in order to design targeted content area instruction that is tailored to the specific needs of our ELLs, and that is rooted in best-instructional practices and ESL methodologies 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs are provided with daily support not only from the ESL coordinator but also special educators. All students have mentors 7  with whom they communicate on a regular basis. Translation is provided whenever needed There is support and scaffolding for all students with special attention given to ELL's. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Increased use of technology in the classroom, including the implementation of tablets for every student, should assist in improving content and language acquisition. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are invited to join any extracurricular activities they are interested in. School staff or outside sources are able to assist in translation if needed. Moreover, students are enrolled in an early college program and are involved in programs not only at our school, but are afforded opportunities to participate in programs at Queensborough and through SAP. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Technology, including Kindles, iPad and laptop usage, is in daily lesson plans 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? As a small school, we have limited opportunities to deliver instruction in students' home language. However, dictionaries in all languages have been made available to all ELL's. We only have a stand alone push-in ESL program currently. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Data about students in analyzed and reviewed to help create appropriate lesson plans and used to plan lessons, to differentiate instruction based on student needs, and to formulate flexible groupings of students needing enrichment (above grade level), review & practice (on grade level), re-teaching (slightly below grade level), and remediation (significantly below grade level). Additionally, acquired data will be further reviewed by administrators and our Instructional Team in order to plan and implement differentiated professional development within the school community 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Technology, including Kindles, iPad and laptop usage, is in daily lesson plans 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Translation is provided when needed and a dictionaries are provided. The ESL teacher manages this, but currently we have no such students.. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Technology for ESL students 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 8  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We are a PROSE school and meet every Wednesday from 2:40 until 4:00pm for PD. We currently have only one ELL teacher. While planning units and lessons, we review the common core standards associated with the unit, often times referring to student work that meets the standards. We have also created a standards progression document, outlining the standards as they progress through the units in reading, writing, listening, and speaking. The ESL teacher is a part of the unit and lesson planning. Specific examples of labsites: Modeled lessons in classes containing ESL students, planning sessions on how to meet the needs of all students (including ELLs). 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. N/A. We are a high school • Create and implement student derived extracurricular activities during before and after school hours. Students in coordination with teachers and staff will develop and coordinate activities of interest to participate in before and after school hours to increase student engagement. • Monthly campus wide celebrations and activities for students, teachers, and staff. • ELL training from the ESL teachers well as outside sources • Skedula student progress reports indicating student behavior sent to parents. • Daily phone calls and messages indicating attendance of student via network group leader and school messenger. • Parent volunteers to assist in extracurricular activities. • Professional development with NYC Commission on Human Rights for all teachers and staff. • Structured procedures to handle student discipline and behavior issues Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? These are done via phone or Skype with parents as many families live an hour away from school. Most parents speak enough English to communicate with the ESL teacher or they have a representative speak with us. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 9  All parents are invited to attend PTA meetings, which are held on Saturdays to accommodate parents' busy schedules. ELL parents have also been part of C-30 procedures. Our school also holds student led conferences instead of parent/teacher conferences. In this way, students lead meetings and have conversations with parents about their progress in school and their goals. Because these conferences are student led, almost all parents attend. We have had all ELL parents attend these conferences. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. not applicable 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Patrice Henry, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Business Technology Early Coll School DBN: 26Q315 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Patrice Henry Title Principal Melissa Manzo Assistant Principal Britney Russell Parent Coordinator Ken Dornbaum ENL/Bilingual Teacher Edith Young Parent Lisa Modafferi Teacher/Subject Area Derek Lee Teacher/Subject Area Angela Olarte n/a Coach Coach Amy Perlmutter School Counselor Fred Walsh NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Lisa Barone Other Related Services NA NA Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 315 School Name: BTECH Superintendent: Fred Walsh The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Dornbaum ESL Coordinator Y Y Ken * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At the beginning of the school year, we survey each family to ascertain the home language and language preferred to receive school communication in. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English 50 50 50 50 3  Bangali Urdu Spanish 30 50 50 30 50 50 30 50 50 30 50 50 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Bengali, Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Welcome letter to families, progress reports, family newsletter, principal communication on school procedures and events, academic events 8/31/17 Monthly newsletters Monthly SLC Conference notes Quarterly Informational updates Quarterly Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We utilize google translate and other software tools to assist us in translating materials We utilize google translate and other software tools to assist us in translating materials We utilize google translate and other software tools to assist us in translating materials We utilize google translate and other software tools to assist us in translating materials 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Student led conference, PTA, individual family meetings as needed, college workshops Quarterly college workshops Yearly interpretation service(s)? ESL Coordinator and DOE translation services ESL Coordinator and DOE translation services 4  PTA meetings IEP/ELL meetings Monthly Quarterly ESL Coordinator and DOE translation services ESL Coordinator and DOE translation services 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We translate school information in the home language of our limited-English proficient families, use translation services and utilize our ESL coordinator and staff who speak other languages other than English. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff receive training and support to ensure they meet the expectations of serving of Ell populaton Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We translate each communicate we send home into the dominate language(s) as well as record robo call messages in both English and Spanish Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We rely on parent verbal feedback and email communications 5 
