 27Q316 School Name: QUEENS EXPLORERS ELEMENTARY SCHOOL Principal: MELISSA COMPSON   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Queens Explorers Elementary School 342700010316 School Number (DBN): 27Q316 3K,PK, K, 1, 2, 3, 4 Grades Served: School Address: 90-07 101st Avenue, Ozone Park 11416 Phone Number: 7185587088 Fax: 7185587091 School Contact Person: Melissa Compson Email Address: mcompso@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Melissa Compson Christina Tracy Marisol Pena Diana Bramante LinaMoreno N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jennifer Ambert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, 11416 jambert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 7186425770 Phone Number: District 27 FSC: 7183482994 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jean McKeon Executive Director:   82-01 Rockaway Blvd, Ozone Park, NY 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: jmckeon3@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7183482919 Phone Number: 7183482994 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Melissa Compson Christina Tracy MarisolPena Lina Moreno Diana Tonne Rosa M. Rodriguez Giselle Torres *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable CSA Member Parent Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kristen Chiarotti Lori Smith Stephanie Sheflin JenniferFonseca Michelle Nurse Parent Teacher Teacher Teacher Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission: Section 4: CEP Overview At Queens Explorers Elementary School, we are committed to teaching students the essential skills to become active and engaged global citizens. We will build character through our core values of responsibility, respect, and trust, and teach social action to affect positive change in our local community and around the globe. Students will make global   connections and impact the world for the better through an interdisciplinary curriculum and service learning programs. Core Values: Trust: All stakeholders communicate freely with the confidence that others will be critical, compassionate, consistent, knowledgeable, honest and open. Responsibility: All stakeholders will join as partners in having mutual accountability for meeting the academic and social needs of all students. Respect: All stakeholders demonstrate an attitude of consideration toward the world, the community, the school, each other, and themselves through thoughtful actions and words. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Student Population and Needs: Our population for the 2018-2019 school year is 3K to Fourth Grade. We will have 3K, pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, first, second and third grade in our school. Academically this population needs a strong foundation in language development, reading, and mathematics. As we move into incorporating STEAM into out curriculum we want to give students a strong foundation in science, technology, engineering, the Arts and mathematics. These specific needs determine resources that we will need such as quality texts, manipulatives, and resources that support students in multiple modalities. Special Initiatives: We are a Magnet School with a theme of Global Conservation and Service Learning. At Queens Explorers Magnet School for Global Conservation and Service Learning, each student participates in five Service Learning Projects per year. Each of these projects has a community aligned component and a globally aligned component. We collaborate with Service in Schools as well as artists and other organizations around the world for each project. All of our ELA Units have been revised to include a variety of STEAM components and give students a wide variety of foundational skills in Science, Technology, Engineering, The Arts, and Mathematics. In our building we will have an Action Based Learning Lab, and a Maker Space room, Block Room, as well as a Sunworks Lab where students will learn gardening, and science skills and how it can be enhanced with Modern Technology. To enhance the arts we are collaborating with Noel Pointer Violin program and the Materials for the arts. We have partnerships with the World Conservation Society, Arts Connection, Sunworks, Alley Pond, and Materials for the arts. Students will be working on Computer Science skills and out 2nd, 3rd and 4th grade will be 1-1 IPAD Classrooms. After schools programs based on STEAM expose students to Coding, Dance, Cooking, Project Based Learning, and engineering. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school has 38 ENL Students ranging from emerging to commanding. In addition we have 34 special needs students. Within those two groups we have a subgroup of 5 students who are both ENL and SWD. 0  Each subgroup has specific needs including the need for instructional support, small group guidance, medical needs, and social-emotional needs. Some of the needs that students have in regards to academics are reading support, both in decoding and comprehension. Specific strategies are used within their instructional programs for small group and individual instruction. Some students are provided with a teaching assistant to support their instructional, s/e, and/or medical needs. Smaller intervention groups are designed to assist with behavior needs, social emotional needs, guidance and academic intervention. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Progress Over the Past Year: Throughout the past year, we have shown exceptional progress in many areas related to the Framework for Great Schools. Specifically our area of greatest progress is that we have developed a community and culture of TRUST. Our staff, our families, and our community members such as business owners and politicians have built a connection with the school. The school is a family. We are a “small town school in a big city.” We have enhanced our curriculum by incorporating STEAM components into each unit. Each grade level completes 6 Computer Science activities a year and our 3rd grade has become a 1-1 IPAD classroom. In the 2018-2019 we will continue to expand our curriculum using technology and having grades 2-4 become 1-1 IPAD classrooms. We will have a lunchtime technology program, we will continue to grow our arts program including violin and recorder, as well as having an engineering and design teacher to enhance curriculum. Over the past year we have made progress in other areas too. Our Quality Review took place in April 2015 and we are extremely proud of the results. We were Well-Developed in the areas of Curriculum, Assessment, School Culture, and Professional Collaborations. We were Proficient in the area of Teacher Pedagogy. In the Framework For Great Schools, these align to a Supportive Environment, Rigorous Instruction, and Collaborative Teachers. Our area of focus includes Strong Family - Community ties. This is an area of focus because our student population is growing and we want to maintain close ties to our families and community. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q316 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 386 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 19 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A 19 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 76.0% % Attendance Rate 66.1% % Reduced Lunch 4.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.9% 49.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 11.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.25 0% 50% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 54.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 15 15 92.4% 10.1% 10.1% 6.7% 25.9% 6.0% 0 11% 4 71.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school, our instructional priorities are Language Development, Scaffold Support, Data Driven Instruction, and Integrated Technology. These priorities drive the academic program and structures that we put in place. Each structure and program must also align with our core values of TRUST, Respect, and Responsibility. Base the data of the 2017-2018 school year Fountas and Pinnell (F&P) Periodic Assessment from our students in June 2018, the data showed that students in Kindergarten continue to need work on decoding and fluency. Students in grade 2 and 3 are continuing to work on comprehension. We have to address the needs of the students in reading. The priorities are: Letter Identity, Letter Sound, Letter Formation, Oral Language, Beginning Sounds, Sight words, Leveled reading , Comprehension, Fluency, and stamina. Based on the NYC school Survey we will continue to work on teacher to teacher trust. This will include Social Emotional Teacher Professional Learning, that began in June of 2018. Grade Leaders also had planning during the summer. Teams created social emotional norms and took part in team building in the summer. Strengths: During the school year, the teachers cooperatively built the ELA and Math interdisciplinary units using our instructional priorities. We were able to common plan and develop a common vocabulary and philosophy around curriculum planning and instruction to meet the needs of all students. Teachers have incorporated STEAM into each ELA Unit, Multiple Entry points, Self and Peer Assessment, Authentic Student Discourse. Data Source: Fountas and Pinnell (June 2018) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 3  By June 2019, at least 60% of students in Kindergarten and First grade are expected to progress at least 4 Fountas and Pinnel levels, Second and third graders are expected to move 3 or more levels, and Fourth grade students are expected to move 2 or more levels as measured by the Spring Fountas and Pinnell Periodic Assessment. 4 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9/18- 6/19 Supporting Teachers- Letter identity and sounds, language development, sight word identification, guided reading Students who have difficulty identifying letters, sounds, and those who need support speaking in sentences, decoding words, and need comprehension skills K-3 Families 9/18-6/19 Teachers All Students 8/18-6/19 Teachers and Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  RTI Groups (Reteach and Enrich) – All Students, including SWD and ENL students, identified as having high need based upon the F&P assessments, Wilson Fundations assessments, unit writing performance tasks, reading comprehension passages, and language interviews are supported in small groups for repetition. Data is collected in 6 week cycles based upon grade teams using wilson, F&P levels as well as guided reading and writing anectdotals. Teachers use progress monitoring data sheets to keep track of students weekly goals. The data is then brought back to the group meetings to form the next 6 week cycle. Raz Kids- Subscriptions for families to access electronic independent reading books. Guided Reading Support: Teachers have Professional Learning Sessions throughout the year to enhance their guided reading practice. In addition they will have classroom support to work with students during guided reading. Teachers will have Fountas and Pinnell training to learn how to administer running records and use the running record data to assess students. Teachers ill also be provided with Fundations and Wilson training. Teachers will do inter-visitations to share best practices on ELA. Guided Reading and writing Skills. All staff will take part in a 5 danielson observation cycle but others will conduct intervisitations based on their growth mindset goals. In addition this year we will have a Literacy Specialist that is in the building 2.5 days a week to train teachers on a weekly basis. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. As a school we will create multiple opportunities to engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core. - School Website that will have tutorials for parents, HW sheets, teacher information and curriculum newsletter of monthly information for subjects. Parent Activities to understand Rigorous Instruction and CCLS: Parent workshops throughout the year. At least 2 events at school per month, Weekly homework sheet with CCLS aligned questions and translated for home discussion, Memos home to inform parents of the expectations, rubrics sent home. Online communications have been implemented in a variety of ways; parent teacher conference appointments, emails, facebook, Instagram and online schedule. Monthly Newsletters to inform parents about current topics students are learning in the classroom. Each PTA meeting will have a School Highlight to inform parents about different areas. Scholastic Book Fair, Dr. Seuss Day, and Mystery Readers to encourage reading in school and at home. A Reading Analysis graph is sent home after each reading cycle to communicate with parents their childs reading level and where they fall in comparison to their peers. Mommy and Me is a group for families of students who have siblings 2-4 years old. There is a series of PK readiness and transitioning to kindergarten workshops. Family Engagement Nights- Throughout the year there are support workshops to help parents work with students. In addition there are activities planned for families that are common core, STEAM and Magnet aligned - Monthly Curriculum Newsletters that shares curriculum across grade levels and suggestions to assist students with concepts at home -Weekly Emails from teachers to parents using class DOJO, DOE email, REMINDS APP, school messenger -Parent Workshops on ELA and Math Topics by grade level -HW sheet with question prompts for parents to take part in meaningful content related discourse Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources: 6  RTI (Reteach and Enrich)– Teachers to teach small group, instructional resources such as manipulative and extra materials, flexible scheduling for teachers and students, space provided to meet with a small group. Time to analyze data and develop CCLS foci, instructional resources, space to meet with groups for some classes Explicit Teaching of Vocabulary – Professional Learning around how vocabulary will be taught at Queens Explorers, materials to make word wall cards and pictures, Promethean board to display and teach vocabulary. Parent Workshops – School Staff will provide evening and daytime workshops, time for teachers to plan the workshop, materials for teachers and parents to utilize and take home- CCLS/Reading/Math Focused Classroom Lending Library – Books for the library, time scheduled for lending and return School Library- Teacher to enhance subject areas, books for students to take out, Bi-weekly Schedule PK Reading Buddies – Time scheduled, buddy book bags, schedule accommodation MS210 reading Buddies – Time scheduled, schedule adjustment, buddy book bags, space allocation Family Engagement Nights – Teacher leader time, books, document Camera, crafts and other materials Oral Storytelling – Books, props, teacher training Professional Development- Time scheduled, research based strategies, materials, flexible scheduling ELA Center Time – Fountas and Pinnell Intervention kits, GR books and guides to plan, time scheduled Learn by doing – Time scheduled, materials for students to interact with using Wilson Fundations curriculum Books for Families at Registration and Summer Work Packet Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point progress will take place during the February 2019 F&P assessment. In February, at least 60% of students are expected to progress at least 2 Fountas and Pinnell levels in K-3 and 1 in fourth grade as measured by the Winter Fountas and Pinnell Periodic Assessment in grades K-4. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell Periodic Reading Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We have created a CARE team (Children Are Reason Enough) that is comprised of the Principal, the Guidance Counselor, invited support staff, and invited teachers. The goal of this team is to support the social-emotional well being of ALL students so that they are able to be in class, to learn, and to have easier access to the academic program. We will focus on ENL and SWD subgroups as well as individual students who are identified as needing an individual action plan. Each child being serviced by the CARE team will receive an individual action plan and case manager. The CARE team discusses the needs of students on an individual basis, assigns a case manager to each student discussed, and determines an action plan for those students (which always includes the family). We revisit each student’s progress with each monthly meeting. The caseload of students have varying circumstances from temporary housing, to family distress, behavior changes ect. Data Source: CARE Log Strengths and Needs: In the Framework for Great Schools, our strengths include the Supportive Environment, Rigorous Instruction, and Collaborative Teachers. This is supported by our Well-developed ratings on the aligning rubrics of the Quality Review. Our area of focus includes Strong Family - Community ties which correlates to supporting the social-emotional well being of students. This is an area of focus because our student population is growing and we want to maintain close ties to our families and community. to give students the social-emotional support that ic necessary for their growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 the CARE Team will decrease the school-wide Social-Emotional caseload from 20 students in October 1, 2018 to 10 students as measured by June 1, 2019 CARE/SIT/PPT caseload. 8 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based  instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School-Wide Positive Behavior Intervention and Support (PBIS) Students 9/18-6/19 All Teachers and Staff The school will have tokens that are given when students show trust, respect, and responsibility. Tokens are also given out for the classes that receive 100% attendance. Each token given goes into a class bucket. The students in the class collaborate with the teacher on an experiential goal, which is noted outside the classroom door. The Principal also has TRUST, respect, and responsibility stickers that are personalized with a comment, and sent home on the student’s shirts. Stickers are given based upon the core values. The students and parents are asked to have a discussion about the message on the sticker. Specialty Spotlight- Students in art, music, and gym are 9  recognized for specific achievements in the subject area, Trust – Students learn the definition of trust and are rewarded exemplifying the core value. Ray of Sunshine – Teachers pass the “Ray of Sunshine,” which is a small stuffed sun with an attached ring of compliment cards, around the building to thank colleagues for bringing a healthy positive “Ray of Sunshine” to Queens Explorers. Family Spotlight – Parents are invited into the classrooms and they can highlight a career or skill. The parent can visit as many classrooms as they would like. They then have their picture taken with their child and the main office hangs it up. Mystery Readers- Parents are invited to come in to read a story to their child's class. The teacher will provide the class with a set of clues and then the mystery reader will bring in a story of their choice to celebrate reading in the classroom. Trust – The school- family connection builds trust because parents are invited into the school as partners in the student’s education. Handling Off Culture Behavior – Teacher training through Ramapo For Children and reading of LOST AT SCHOOL by Ross W. Greene on addressing lagging skills and unmet needs. Teachers will be trained on how to greet student each morning, how to utilize a cool down area in the classroom, using tokens as classroom rewards and ways to Teachers positive attitudes affect students every day 9/18-6/19 Staff Students 9/18-6/19 Staff Parents Students Targeted Subgroups 9/18-6/19 Staff 0  make students feel valued in the classroom to enhance their social and emotional learning. Teachers will be trained in handling off culture behavior and working with the guidance counselor on implementing restorative circles. Trust – Families can trust that the students are in a caring and nurturing environment while in school. SWD and ENL subgroups are targeted in class and in small groups/1:1 as a way to address lagging skills and unmet needs. Global Exploration – Students will learn about the core values of TRUST, Respect, and Responsibility through exploration of places and concepts affecting the world through the Global lending library, Global Travelling trunk, Global Virtual Field Trips and the Global component of the Service learning projects. Trust – Families can trust that the school is preparing their children to be 21st Century Global Citizens. Student Council – A group of students is led by two lead teachers to make age appropriate decisions for our school and practice leadership skills. Trust – Students learn to trust each other to make decisions for the school. Students 9/18-6/19 Staff Student leaders 9/18-6/19 Teachers 1 9/18-6/19 Professionalism and positive attitudes of teachers will positively affect every student every day Staff Principal 3K- Grade 1 Students 9/18-6/19 Staff Students who need support socially and/or emotionally, Targeted subgroups 9/18-6/19 Staff Teacher Biographies- All teachers and staff including the Principal, write biographies. Those biographies are hanging outside their classroom/office to show professionalism and help families build TRUST in and respect for the staff as they send their children to Queens Explorers. Trust – Families learn more about the staff and this sets a foundation on which trust can build. Instructional Lunch – The students will have an “instructional lunch” in the classroom to build life skills, manners, language through peer and adult interaction, and concepts around the core values. Trust – Students trust each other and their teacher as they build community and relationships. 2 X 10 – Teachers will give 1:1 time for two minutes per day, for 10 days in a row. The students that are chosen will rotate and will be students who have shown they need teacher support Trust – Teachers and students build trust through their 1:1 conversation and relationship building techniques. SWD and ENL subgroups are targeted in class and in small groups/1:1 as a way to form relationships, address lagging skills and unmet needs. Morning Meeting – The morning meeting includes a greeting, Students 9/18-6/19 Staff 2  sharing, activity, and morning message. This will build community inside the classroom as well as language skills. Morning Greeting: Each day students are welcomed by the principal before they head up to their classroom. Then as students enter their classroom teachers greet each students one by one. Trust – The classroom builds community and trust through sharing and communication CARE Team – Team put together to develop action plans for students who are in need of individual social/emotional support. This team works to build TRUST, respect, and the feeling of responsibility with the families of those students we work closely with. Trust – Families, teachers, administrators and students build a mutual trust as we collaboratively form action plans to support the students. SWD and ENL subgroups are targeted in class and in small groups/1:1 as a way to form relationships, address lagging skills and unmet needs. At Risk Counseling – Guidance counselor and parents collaborate on supporting individual students. Trust – The families and school build a mutual trust in supporting the students through ongoing-targeted counseling. Students who need support socially and/or emotionally, Targeted subgroups 9/18-6/19 Principal Guidance Counselor Invited staff Students who need support socially and/or emotionally 9/18-6/19 Guidance Counselor Speech Teacher Individual Parents 3  At Risk Speech- The Speech teacher and parents collaborate on supporting individual students. SWD and ENL subgroups are targeted in class and in small groups/1:1 as a way to form relationships, address lagging skills and unmet needs. Summer Orientation – Each family has a chance to meet the staff before the school year begins and and see their childs teacher. Trust – The orientation sets the groundwork for trust to build, using conversations and meetings between the families, students, and staff. Family Registration – A school pedagogue is available at each family registration to answer questions and make the family feel comfortable and excited about the new school year. Trust – The orientation sets the groundwork for trust to build, using conversations and meetings between the families, students, and staff. Service Learning Projects – Five service learning projects per year that aligns with our core values of TRUST, Respect, and Responsibility and has a community and global component to raise awareness for Conservation. Summer Phone Calls – In order to start building TRUST early, the staff called families to remind them of classrooms, supplies, and Students 8/18 Principal Selected Staff Students Spring 2018 Staff Students 9/18-6/19 Staff Students Families 9/18-6/19 Staff 4 Students Families 9/18-6/19 Teachers Classes 9/18-6/19 Staff Students 9/18-6/19 Staff form relationships with parents and students from early on. Trust – The orientation sets the groundwork for trust to build, using conversations between the families and staff. First Week Phone Call - Teachers call home to all parents during the first week to form relationships with the families and say something positive! Trust – The orientation sets the groundwork for trust to build, using conversations between the families, students, and staff. Absences/ Lateness The classes with 100% attendance daily are announced on the loud speaker in the morning and those classes receive a core value token for being so responsible and coming to school on time each day. Students who are absent are given a daily call by our Attendance Team to monitor absences. Respect For All Week- Each day students will wear a different color to show respect for a variety of items. For example respect for our Earth or No Bullying. Students will take part in poster and essay contests to share what Respect means to them and how to instill it in others. Each student received a certificate of participation. Monthly Celebration Activities: Students can participate in Monthly activities to celebrate school culture. Some examples are Sock-tober and be Goals for 2018 posters. 5  School-wide Guidance Program – Guidance program put in place for all students as a way to address and grow their social-emotional needs Students Targeted Subgroups 9/18-6/19 Guidance Counselor Trust – This program builds trustworthy mindsets and behaviors through focusing on the social-emotional, academic, and physical well being of the child. SWD and ENL subgroups are targeted in class and in small groups/1:1 as a way to form relationships, address lagging skills and unmet needs. Staff Parents PTA Staff Introductions- All staff will be introduced at the first PTA meeting (September) and the staff member is given a chance to speak with the parents. Parents will have a chance to get to know all teachers. Trust – The families and staff build trust because they know whom their children are interacting with on a daily basis. 9/18-6/19 Staff PTA Star Factor Staff 9.18- 6.19 Principal Social Emotional Training for Staff Students Guidance Counselor COmmunication and Teamwork Skills Teacher Student Interactions Both the principal and Guidance Counselor attended Restorative Circle Training and Formal Restorative Conferencing. This will be implemented with Students 9.18- 6.19 Guidance Counselor 6 students by the guidance counselor. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Workshops given by the Guidance, Occupational Therapy, and Speech Team Workshops to support parents of SWD and ENL students and how to make learning fun and engage students through family activities. Family STEAM Night- Hosted by Teacher Teams Partnership Paint Night where students and parents paint a canvas together- Hosted by SLT Literacy Night- Hosted by Teachers Relay Races and Game nights where parents learn skills to interact and support students- Hosted by the Teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Wide PBIS – Tokens, Token Bucket CARE Team – Scheduled monthly meetings, resources and teacher time Ray of Sunshine - Sunshine Toy, note cards, positive attitude Family Spotlight/ Mystery Readers – Parents giving time to the school, thank you cards, camera, books Teacher Biographies – written biography, camera, frames Morning Meeting – Morning meeting books from “Responsive Classroom” Global Exploration – Lending library books and systems in place in each classroom to schedule lending, traveling trunk and artifacts, time to plan websites for Virtual field trips, human and financial resources for global service projects Student Leadership Team – Teacher leaders and flexible scheduling for meeting times Instructional Lunch – Table clothes, centerpieces, systems in place in each classroom Service Learning Projects – Teacher leads for each project, materials for each project, schedule adjustment for implementation and celebration. Handling Off Culture Behavior – Teacher time and money to bring in an outside vendor, teacher turnkey scheduling 7  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, the school-wide caseload is expected to be 10 students or less as measured by the CARE log. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. CARE log Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a growing school we have hired additional teachers and staff to meet the needs of all students. We needed to make sure we have staff for each classroom, as well as support staff with expertise in both academic and social-emotional supports for students. A Hiring Team interviewed all potential candidates through a series of interviews and we hired based upon the best match for the schools vision. All staff members also had to show the interview team that they were committed to a collaborative culture that aligned with our core values of TRUST, Respect, and Responsibility. In addition staff members changed grades and moved from early childhood to elementary teaching positions. To build our collaboration and trust , we need structures in place for teachers and staff to build a growth mindset, and also for teachers to work together to share their learning’s. We also need materials and resources for teachers to use, such as a professional library, and collaborative planning time. We need both new and old staff to engage in structured professional collaboration on teams using inquiry approaches that promote shared leadership and focus on improved student learning. During the 2017-2018 School year, each teacher participated in at least 8 self-driven professional learning opportunities. Teachers were rated under the Danielson Domain 4e. Data Source: Teacher PD Logs, PD Agendas, Common Planning Binders, Administrator Grade Level Meeting Binder, Quality Review Data, Advance Data, Observation Reports, Teacher Surveys Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, each teacher will build his/her “Growth mindset” by participating in at least eight self- driven professional development opportunities and turnkey that information at least 1 time during professional learning as measured by the PD log and the 4e Danielson rubric. In addition teachers will take part in Danielson Professional learning and will present stategies by grade level to their peers as well as take part in 1 Danielson Intervisitation cycle to observe best practices. The impact of this PD cycle is to share best practices and see similar strategies thoughout grade levels and build on skills throughout grade levels. 9  0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Workshop Series for Teachers – There will be a series of workshops implemented to the staff which focus’ on Danielson, Instructional shifts, etc. Students, Targeted Subgroups 9/18-6/19 Teachers Principal SWD and ENL subgroups are targeted – Specific strategies and practices that address the lagging skills and unmet needs are embedded into the workshops. Common planning time 4-8 times per week for grade levels. Multiple weekly grade level meetings. Glows and grows informal feedback. Observation reflection sheet. Unit Revisions and Reflection meetings 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers 9/18-6/19 Principal AP Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. See Above... Parent Bulliten Boards- Change Monthly- Parent Coordinator Parent Emails- Weekly- Teachers Parent Communication Log- Weekly-Teachers Workshops- Varies throughout the year- Given by other parents, Local companies or staff members Turn Key Strategies to Parents – The teachers will turn key strategies to parents during each unit. This includes sending home materials for the students and online guided reading program: RAZ Kids and Mathletics. There are also parenting, speech, Nutrition, Bullying and stress management workshops. 1  Trust – Parents trust that they will receive information to help them to help their students in an ongoing basis. SWD and ENL subgroups are targeted - Specific strategies and practices that address the lagging skills and unmet needs are determined as strategies are turn keyed. Parent Bulletin Boards – There is a bulletin board for parents to pick up administrative forms as well as reading and math strategies. These are available at all times during the school day. There is a bulletin board in multiple locations for easier access to parents during arrival, dismissal, and school functions. Trust – Parents know they have a place they can go to get calendars, academic information, and parent involvement activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Book Look – Professional books, teacher time, form for note taking (provided) Learning A- Z Online Program Pay it Forward – Outside workshop opportunities, , form for note taking (provided) Glow and Grow – Time and coverage for inter-visitations, , form for note taking (provided) Professional Learning Log – Google Docs training, form for note taking (provided) Technology PL – Financial and human resources to have an outside vendor provide the PD and substitutes to cover the classes for teachers. Handling off culture behavior - Financial and human resources to have an outside vendor provide the PD and time for teachers to turn-key Staff Goals – Instructional priorities and Google Docs training Common Planning Time – Scheduling time and adjustments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2  By the end of February 1, 2019 each teacher is expected to have at least 4 Professional Learning Opportunities logged as measured by PD logs and agendas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher's Growth Mindset Binder Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a growing school and based on last year’s advance data, and quality review data, we want a staff who not only believes all students can succeed but also who believe in and exemplify our core values of TRUST, respect, and responsibility. In the 2017-2018 school year, 24 teachers had been rated using Advance, and 8 teachers were rated under the satisfactory and unsatisfactory rating. In 207-2018 two teachers was rated Highly effective, 22 teachers were rated Effective, and 8 were rated satisfactory. For the 2017-2018 school year we have 5 new teachers to the building and 11 teachers who are teaching new grade levels. Data source: Resume, References, Interview process, Advance, Quality Review Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of teachers at Queens Explorers Elementary school will be rated Satisfactory OR Effective in two or more Instructional Danielson (3b, 3c, 3d) competencies as measured by Principal Observations. 4 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff 9/18-6/19 Staff Principal Assistant Principal Teachers 9/18-6/19 Principal Staff Assistant Principal Staff Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monday Professional Learning – Each month provide teachers with the opportunity to learn at least one ENL/Special education strategy and/or differentiation strategy. This could be turn-key from another teacher/staff member or from the Principal. Turn key opportunities build TRUST among staff members. Trust – Teachers turn key to each other and build trust in each other’s expertise and knowledge. Teachers trust the administrator to focus the PD opportunities on concepts important for school improvement and improvement in teacher practice. SWD and ENL subgroups are targeted - Specific strategies and practices that address the lagging skills and unmet needs are determined as strategies are turn keyed. Observational Data - Principal and the Assistant Principal will use the data from the Formal and Informal Observations to determine what professional learning opportunities will be provided inside the school in whole staff, small group, or on an individual basis. Teacher Leaders – Teachers will work in teams to create Parent Involvement culture systems such as family spotlight, craft literacy night, and workshops that will be implemented throughout the year on a regular basis. These systems will focus on instructional strategies, thematic activities, and align with our core values of TRUST, Respect, and Responsibility. These activities build TRUST within the school community. Trust – Teachers build trust for each other and their expertise 5 Staff 9/18-6/19 Staff Teachers 9/18-6/19 Teachers Staff Goals – Each staff member has three goals for the school year. One is a school-wide language development goal, one is a leader created technology goal, and one is a Danielson based teacher created goal. These goals are referenced in Observation feedback on an individual basis Common Planning with Leader– Each grade level meets with the Principal or Curriculum Coordinator one time per week. At least two of the grade level meetings each month are focused on Data Analysis. Engrade Online Grade book- In efforts to remain transparent, grades is put online. Student’s grades are logged into the Engrade system on a regular basis. Parents have access to their child’s account from any computer. This system builds TRUST and partnerships between the teachers and families because there is ongoing communication. Trust – Staff and families build trust through constant communication and structure reliability. Mentor Opportunities – Seasoned teachers have the opportunity to mentor new and untenured teachers. This program builds TRUST between colleagues and builds TRUST within the school culture. Trust – Teachers and staff members trust each other through communication and feedback cycles. Instructional Rounds – Teachers observe each other and provide each other feedback. This builds an open and honest culture that in turn builds TRUST within our school community. Trust – Teachers build trust between each other using feedback and open their classrooms to each other. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 6  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers and Parents will support families in understanding Effective School Leadership and Strategies by having workshops for parents. Inviting parent bi-annually to discuss school issues at a Coffee with the Principal and Assistant Principal. Inviting parents to Monthly PTA meetings where there is a Principal and School Leadership report given. Strategies are in place to promote parent leadership and engagment through the PTA. Through classroom volunteering opportunities and through parent committees for example the Cultural Day comittee. Parents are encouraged to join SLT or to come and observe the open meetings to listen in on topics. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monday PD – Teacher experts, materials Advance Data – Advance Web Application, research and professional articles/books Teacher Leaders – Teacher time, volunteered time, materials for parents Common Planning – Student data, student work, time each week. Staff Goals – Leader developed goals, Google Docs PD, teacher time and implementation Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end February 2019, 70% of observations will be either rated Effective, Highly Effective, or Satisfactory in two or more of the Instructional Danielson competencies. This will be calculated by taking into consideration the ratings of all competencies in formal and informal observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Observation reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a growing school we want to be responsive to the needs of families in order to build TRUST between all of our stakeholders. We have tried holding events during the day and in the evening. We have found that in the evening we have had higher attendance and therefore, when possible, we will hold events in the evening at 6pm. Also, based upon the feedback from School designed Parent Surveys, Framework For Great Schools Report and from the PTA Executive Board, parents are interested in family activities in the evening. Therefore, we are working to provide activities that align with our core values, the Common Core Learning Standards, and our instructional program. Data Source: Monthly Calendars, Family Involvement Logs, School Designed Surveys, Framework For Great Schools Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will implement at least three family events per month that align with our school’s core values of TRUST, RESPECT and RESPONSIBILITY, the Common Core Learning Standards, STEAM, our magnet theme of Conservation and Service Learning and the instructional program as measured by monthly Calendar and the Family Involvement Log. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Engagement Nights – Parents and students participate in read aloud night, crafts nights, science night, karate night, movie nights, workout activities, paint night, game night,sports night, STEAM, healthy habits workshop. Family Spotlight, Mystery Readers, Dr. Suess Day, Art show – Family members are invited to come into the classrooms each month to highlight a career, skill, culture or hobby, or read to a classroom. Families 9/18-6/19 Teachers Principal Families 9/18-6/19 Teachers Principal Families 9/18-6/19 Teachers PTA Members Principal Families 9/18-6/19 Teachers PTA Members Principal Parent Workshops – Parents have the opportunity to participate in Coffee Socials, stress management, speech, bullying awareness, and nutrition workshops. Teacher leaders will prepare workshops for the parents and present for parents in order to distribute information or provide them with a strategy for working with their children. Strategies will be used that address the needs of SWD, ENL students, and struggling students. Parents were invited to take part in a Cornell University Summer Nutrition Institute that takes place weekly in the building. Trust – Parents and teachers build trust and rely on each other for communication of information. Family Spotlight – Teachers work with parents to bring families into the classrooms to spotlight a career, skill, culture, or hobby. The families are encouraged to visit as many classrooms as they can so that students and families feel a sense of community and responsibility toward all of our students. Mystery Readers- Parents are invited to come in and read a story to their childs classroom. This will happen on a bi-weekly basis. College Awareness- Staff members, and families discussed college options and raised awareness to students about different opportunities. Trust – Families and the school build trust by opening up classrooms for parents to interact with the students and teacher. 9 PTA – The Parent Teacher Association will create family events at the school at times that are convenient for parents. Some events included, Dances, craft night,s parent book club, bakesales, culture day and icecream socials. Trust – Families trust that the school is a hub of activity and will provide a community feeling. Families 9/18-6/19 PTA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Councilman Ulrich's Office Ozone Park Public Library Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Literacy night – document camera, book, craft, teachers, time in the evening, notices Family Spotlight - Parents giving time to the school, thank you cards, camera, sign-up sheet and reminder notice Parent Workshop – Teacher leaders, time, materials, notices to parents PTA – Collaboration with Principal, evening teacher and parent time, materials Dismissal – Time scheduled, teacher PD on dismissal system Nightly Events- Teachers, Time sheduled, materials Summer Orientation – Teacher PD and planning time, time scheduled, materials First Week Phone Call – Teacher time and PD on phone call protocol Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 0  By end of February 2019, we will have had at least two family events each month as measured by the monthly calendar and the Family Involvement Log. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly Calendars, Agendas, sign in sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Scores on Wilson Fundations and F&P level, Practice State Exams Mathematics Science Scores on MOSL, periodic assessment and Unit assessments,Practice State Exams Unit Performance Task and Language Interview Social Studies Unit Performance Task and Language Interview Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group push in and pull out School day Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) -Guided Reading -Use of Kinesthetic learning style “Learn by doing”, repetition -Interactive Passage Work -Writing Groups RTI small group Reteach and Enrich Low-Risk Dramatic Play room to build language and vocabulary, Vocabulary Focus Group to build content vocabulary and language, materials aligning to theme Low-Risk Dramatic Play room to build language and vocabulary, Small group push in and pull out, School day School day Grouping by skill/standard Small group push in and pull out 1:1 Field trips- real world, hands on experiences, digital field trips Small group push in and pull out School day 1:1 Vocabulary Focus Group to build content vocabulary Field trips- real world, hands on 2  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) At risk Counseling – determined by the CARE Team At risk Speech At risk ENL services and language, materials aligning to theme Sessions provided while working with individual families experiences, digital fieldtrips Small group and/or 1:1 School day 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 3 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We conduct a needs assessment. We assess if students need counseling, supplies, academic assistance, uniforms, after care, or before care. Based upon the needs assessment we will reach out to the student and family and arrange counseling, supplies, academic support etc. We provide students in temporary housing services to assist them. We provide them with materials and resources that they and their families may need. For example, we provide them with school supplies, book bags, uniforms, etc. so that they can be prepared for school. We also provide students in temporary housing with at risk services such as student support groups, at risk counseling, breakfast/lunch clubs. These opportunities provide students with positive social/emotional interactions. Academically we also provide students with reteach and/or enrich groups to close gaps in both ELA and Math. This occurs 5 days per week. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to recruit qualified teachers, we have a hiring team that chooses qualified candidates that will fit with our school community both in teaching practice and in culture. We work with those teachers through the school year using common planning, new teacher meetings, post observation conferences, etc. to on-board the teachers and retain them long-term. We work diligently to determine assignments before the beginning of each school year, being sure to place a team of teachers together who will be successful and work collaboratively for the students. During the week during common planning time and also during Monday and Tuesday after school professional learning time, administrators and teachers provide PD to colleagues. Also, we ask experts to come into the school to facilitate a PD on certain specific topics. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). As a staff, we focus on the Danielson competencies and the ELA and Math shifts. We use these as a basis for learning about how to improve teacher practice and how to support students in reaching grade level CCSS. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 6  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 1. In May, parents of all preschool students are invited to the school for a family involvement evening. The parents will be informed about the transition to Kindergarten, elementary school structures, what to expect in Kindergarten, and provided with materials to use with their children over the summer. 2. The Preschool students are visited by the kindergarten students and provided with the opportunity to ask questions to kindergarten students. The Kindergarten students can also tell the preschool students about kindergarten. 3. The Preschool students are given the opportunity to visit and participate in a classroom lesson with the kindergarten students and teachers. 4. The registration period provides multiple time frames for parents to come to the school and experience a 1:1 registration experience with a school pedagogue. Any initial questions can be answered and paperwork filled out. 5. A summer orientation is provided for the students. Each family is provided with an appointment to meet the teacher and see the school before the school year begins. 6. Summer Mailings/Emails – A package is sent to all families with the supply list, uniform code, welcome letter, and other information parents may need to begin the school year. 7. First Week Phone Call – The new kindergarten teachers of the preschool students make a phone call to all families in the first week of school. This phone call is a positive conversation about the student’s first few days of school and also provides the parents with the opportunity to ask any further questions. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 1. Common planning periods each week allow teachers to discuss levels of students and needs of the students. 2. Periodic assessments are given on a periodic basis (4x per year). Teachers are also provided the opportunity to assess the students using these periodic assessments as needed on an individual basis (F&P, MOSL) 3. Monthly data/assessment meetings with the principal give the team a chance to discuss progress and assessment revisions, additions, changes needed. 4. Performance tasks, tests, and language development interviews are designed by the teacher teams in conjunction with research based curriculums and principal approval. 7  5. Professional development is provided to teachers by the principal, the network/borough, and trained staff as a way to norm how assessments are administered and analyzed. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) $145,071 $0 $0 $0 $2,089,005 X x Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5, 8 Section 5 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 8   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Queens Explorers Elementary School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Queens Explorers Elementary School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; Beginning, middle, end of school year survey for parents to voice their need on material and training SLT class parent to present info from the SLT to the parents of their class. Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 0  Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parents field trips to enhance learning and promote bonds between the parents. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English as a New Language students and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. The school will maintain this information. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; -support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable 1  sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act;schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; English, Spanish, Chinese, Urdu, Hindi conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement -holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; -hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; -encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; -supporting or hosting Family Day events; -establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; -encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; -providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; - developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; -providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Queens Explorers Elementary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum - using academic learning time efficiently; 2  -respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; -implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; - offering high quality instruction in all content areas; - providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: - conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; -convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; - arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; - respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; - providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; - involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; -providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; -ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff -ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; -notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 3  - arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; -planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: -creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; -assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); -sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; -supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; -ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; -advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 4  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name Queens Explorers Elementary School Borough Queens School Number 316 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Melissa Compson Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Julissa Acosta Teacher/Subject Area Joanna DeMauro/Math Teacher/Subject Area Nicole Brennan/Science Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal Diana Bramante Coach type here School Counselor Maureen Abernethy Parent Marisol Rivera Parent Coordinator Barbara Luciano Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 5 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 315 6 Total number of ELLs 38 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.06%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) N/A N/A N/A K 1 2 3 Lang. N/A 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses Fountas and Pinnell to assess early literacy skills. This provides us insight into reading skills as well as pre-reading and language skills. We are able to determine if the students can use pictures to say words and if those words are in English or another language. We are also able to determine if they know how to read any words. We are able to have a conversation with the student about the assessment books and determine what language skills the student has. This data helps us inform our instructional plan because we schedule ENL services based upon the needs of the students. We also provide modifications in the units and in our lesson plans for the students who need supports based upon language. For example, we have 2 students who do not speak any English and will therefore be utilizing the language development room to develop everyday as well as academic language in a low risk environment. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 7 Periodic assessment periods for Fountas and Pinnell Guided reading periods on a daily basis Reteach and Enrich periods for ELA and Math - 30 minute blocks each per day 30 minute RTI small group guided reading every day Language interview assessment at the end of each unit to assess speaking and listening skills 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We look at the starting point of the ELL students and their NYSITELL score. We then determine progress throughout the year during periodic assessments and when the students practice for the NYSESLAT. We track their progress and at the end of the year we determine if our predicted score for each student on the NYSESLAT matches the actual score. This gives us a better guage as to how we are doing at providing the students with the skills they need. We then revise our curriculum to improve year after year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Reteach and Enrich periods for ELA and Math - 30 minute blocks each per day 30 minute RTI small group guided reading every day Parent/student workshops 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We take the results of the assessments and organize them on one data chart. We separate the ELL subgroup and look at subgroup needs, as well as the needs of the entire grade level. Decisions are then made on the instruction and grouping of these students based upon their needs. During our school day we have RTI during ELA and Math time, as well as two Reteach and Enrich periods for students to learn standards that they need. The students are in smaller groups during this time and teachers may determine to utilize the langauge development room. We use assessment and Data to inform our grouping decisions. After each periodic assessement, we look at the data and determine which students need to be grouped on RTI Levels 1-3. We then make decisions as to the goals for those students and an action plan to meet those goals. We determine the teacher of those students and the time frame. We then look at the data after the time fram and action plan has been carried out to determine progress and needed revisions. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The assessments that we use to evaluate and inform our ELL programs are (1) Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessments (2) NYC Math performance tasks (3) NYSESLAT (4) Math and ELA unit assessments 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Common planning meetings each week with teachers parent/student workshops Public data distribution to families Google Docs data system for reading levels 8  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In our Freestanding ENL program, our students were grouped in one class if possible (They are learning along side their GE classmates). Some students are also served in an integrated program. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In our schedule we determine which periods are the ELA periods, and the ENL teacher groups students based upon their ENL level and serves their minutes accordingly. Where students are flexible, we try to give the students a well rounded support system for the content areas - depending on the students needs in each content area. For students who need stand alone ENL, we determine when in the students schedule they can be pulled out of the classroom and served ENL without missing major content. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Integrated: Content is delivered using a lead ENL teacher or using team teaching model that has been turn-keyed to our teacher teams with the ENL teacher. The teachers plan the lesson together. The ENL teacher will develop physical supports and bring strategies to the lesson plan for later implementation. The team notes on the lesson plan who will be implementing each part of the lesson, down to asking the questions, so that both teachers are equally involved. Each lesson has mandatory language development strategies that the teachers must use (1) develop open ended questions (2) Front load vocabulary using a very specific strategy at the beginning of the lesson (3) K PALS - pairing students with more advanced language skills with those who have developing language skills and (4) Providing verbal and written prompts to assist students in lengthening their utterances. The teachers also must choose among learning style strategies to modify lessons and meet students at their entry points. These strategies include (1) visuals (2) movement (3) music (4) technology (5) Realia, and other strategies that meet learning style preferences. We also provide the teachers with CCLS Professional learning opportuntiies to learn about the shifts in CCLS and how they can be used to meet the needs of the students. We determine what modifications need to be made sot that the students reach the rigorous expectations of the CCLS. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? If a student has difficulty understanding English and responding in English, we provide a translator for the student to determine if they have learned the content and standards that have been taught. The ENL teacher will then schedule time with a staff translator and they will both administer the test to the student. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? a. SIFE 9  b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated based upon the students exact needs and levels. Students who are entering need more stand alone time and they are taught ENL. However former ELL students are flexible and also need some stand alone time to work on extension activities that students in the other levels would not be working on yet. The students who receive the integrated program are taught in the classroom and the ENL teacher and the Classroom teacher have to differentiate for them in the classroom. They will use differentiated teaching strategies, groupings, as well as differentiated physical supports. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Materials Choice - Teachers research materials and determine how supportive they will be and specific times they could use them to assist students in building their everyday and academic vocabulary. We then use the chosen materials with the students and determine if they are helpful. We do a needs assessment as needed. The materials also align to the curriculum and to the expectations of the CCLS. Promethean Board - Each teacher in our school uses technology to enhance instruction and progress to meeting the CCLS. We use it with the ELL students to provide them with visuals, movement, music, interactivity and as another learning style choice. Language Development Room - A room dedicated to using language in low-risk environment. Everyday and academic language is used during this time in center-like activities. Front Load Vocabulary - Vocabulary is taught using a very specific sequence and it is always accompanied by a definition and a visual. This vocabulary is taught at the beginning of the lesson so that it can be used throughout the lesson. Open Ended Questions - Questions are pre-planned to be open ended and also leveled with DOK in order to ensure students have access to higher order thinking questions and that multiple students have the opportunity to engage in the discussion. Verbal and/or written prompts - In order to prompt students to expand their utterances, verbal and or written prompts will be used to help a student begin their thought and speak in complete sentences. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All classes are taught interdisciplinary. This leaves time for Reteach and Enrich Time each day - 2 sessions. During this time we are flexible in our scheduling and can group and regroup students throughout the year based on their needs. This allows them to have time to focus on language, IEP goals, and or curricular goals as needed. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All intervention supports are offered in English - Translation as needed. Guided Reading - Students are grouped by level and language development level. Students are given guided reading based upon their reading level using the Fountas and Pinnell leveling system. Reteach and Enrich ELA - Students in the grade are grouped based upon standards the data shows they need to be retaught or enriched in for ELA Reteach and Enrich Math - Students in the grade are grouped based upon standards the data shows they need to be retaught or enriched in for ELA Cluster Small Groupings - Throughout each day, cluster teachers have small group time in their schedule. They are taught the Wilson Fundations program, as well as Guided Reading, and are able to target small groups. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have put in the Cluster Small Grouping as a way to be more flexible in our scheduling. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We did not have a bilingual program. 0  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All after school activities are offered to all students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Visuals, music, movment area, manipulatives, teacher made charts, teacher made visuals, dioramas, promethean board, document camera, picture dictionary, picture cards 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered by staff members who speak the language. There is one language in our school that is not represented by a staff member. In this instance, we have had the family bring in a trusted friend or family member to translate. We have also utilized google translator to communicate through writing. We have also used the NYCDOE translation phone number multiple times. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We have created a schedule chart to use. This has each student and their required service and supports. It also has the number of minutes and where during the week they are served, as well as the program type (integrated or stand alone) 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Visuals, music, movment area, manipulatives, teacher made charts, teacher made visuals, dioramas, promethean board, document camera, picture dictionary, picture cards 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the school year begins we have an orientation. The family has the opportunity to meet the classroom and ENL teacher and see the classroom and school. The student completes a small assessment/activity during orientation and this provides the teacher with some insight on their level and language. The guidance counselor and principal are available for the families as well. For those students who enroll throughout the school year, the families have a chance to meet the teacher and the guidance counselor gives the family a tour of the school. We also have an interview with the ENL teacher so that we get a sense for the students language and level. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: We do not have a dual language program 1  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers of ELL students started the year with PD on the new ENL CR Part 154 law requirements. Then the teachers were given PD on the levels of their students in their classrooms and where in the schedule they would be served and what schedule accommodations we had to make to serve the students. We then had PD on the vision for Stand Alone services. We then had a PD on the vision for Integrated Services. We then had a PD on how common planning should look when planning with the ENL teacher as a team. PD was given to teachers by the ENL teacher on modifications that could be made to the lesson. This included strategies as well as materials that can be used to support students in their learning. We also provided PD on unpacking the standards so that we can chunk it into parts and teach scaffolded lessons based on these parts. We have determined the shifts in the common core standards and what we can do in our curriculum and lessons to address these shifts. This has helped teachers to determine the modifications, supports, and prompting that needs to take place in order to scaffold for our students as they progress to meeting the CCLS. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The guidance counselor receives the exact same PD as the teachers. PD activities are provided to teachers in school and on their own regarding ELL instruction. Teachers keep a PD log of their own and keep track of the ELL specific PD they have. Also, in our school, we keep a Professional Learning binder with agendas and sign in sheets for all PDs given. We have already given PD on (1) modifications to activities (2) Prompting (3) Vocabulary building (4) Language development strategies. Records of this are maintained in the PD binder agendas and sign in sheets. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher schedules conferences for all parents of ELLs during the mandated parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons. The ENL teacher meets with all parents and at times has phone conferences with those parents who work - although we are flexible in our meeting times. We provide a translator for those parents who need. We also utilize google translator to communicate through writing. Paraprofessionals who speak other home languages are asked to stay for conferences and events per session so that they can translate to families who need it. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We have a PTA and parents of ELL students are involved. We also have parents of ELL students on the SLT. These parents help with written and verbal translations for formal meetings as well as family engagement nights and memos. We determine as a team what types of activities would be desired by all cultures and languages. For example, we have a culture day for families to bring a dish to pass and wear clothing that is specific to their culture. We also have a field day where all families can come and take part in physical activity with healthy snacks. Paraprofessionals who speak other home languages are asked to stay for conferences and events per session so that they can translate to families who need it. We also have a parent coordinator who reaches out to parents on a consistent basis and uses the call-in translation service when needed. 2  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Melissa Compson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Queens Explorers School DBN: 27Q316 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Melissa Compson Title Principal Diana Bramante Assistant Principal Barbara Luciano Parent Coordinator Julissa Acosta ENL/Bilingual Teacher Lena Moreno Parent Joanna Acevedo Teacher/Subject Area Nicole Brennan Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Maureen Abernethy School Counselor Mary Barton Joshua Metz N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 08/09/18 08/09/18 08/09/18 08/09/18 08/09/18 08/09/18 08/09/18 08/09/18 08/09/18 08/09/18 xx/xx/xx 08/09/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 5 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Queens Explorers Elementary School Superintendent: Mary Barton DBN: 27Q316 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Julissa Acosta Teacher yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The first data and method we use is the HLIS and the interview done by a licensed pedagogue with the families and the students. At that interview the ENL teacher asks the families what their preferred communication language is for written communication. This way we can keep track of what languages we need to translate written notices into. Through the interview, the ENL teacher also determines if the conversation is fluent and easily understood in English or if there needs to be an oral translator as well. At some times the family brings a translator with them. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 6  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Chinese Arabic Bengali English 31 2 1 10 357 7.73 0.5 .25 2.49 89.03 33 2 1 11 354 8.23 0.5 .25 2.74 88.28 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Monthly Calendar Breakfast/Lunch Menu Curriculum Newsletter Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We have a staff member designated for oral translation for each language in the school. Monthly Distribution: Calendars, Menu, Curriculum news We also have designated written translators on the staff. If that staff member is not available, the translation hotline provided by the NYCDOE is used. The PTA is also representative of our student body, and are able to provide translation to most languages in our community If school personnel does not speak the language or if it is a non-cover language, we use google translate to provide a translation - either written or spoken 7  Homework Overview Weekly Distribution: PTA notices Homework, PTA Notices from the Principal Flyers for events Periodic Distribution: Notices,event flyers Conference notices/Sign up Trimester Distribution We have a staff member designated for oral translation for each language in the school. We also have designated written translators on the staff. If that staff member is not available, the translation hotline provided by the NYCDOE is used. The PTA is also representative of our student body, and are able to provide translation to most languages in our community If school personnel does not speak the language or if it is a non-cover language, we use google translate to provide a translation - either written or spoken We have a staff member designated for oral translation for each language in the school. We also have designated written translators on the staff. If that staff member is not available, the translation hotline provided by the NYCDOE is used. The PTA is also representative of our student body, and are able to provide translation to most languages in our community If school personnel does not speak the language or if it is a non-cover language, we use google translate to provide a translation - either written or spoken We have a staff member designated for oral translation for each language in the school. We also have designated written translators on the staff. 8  If that staff member is not available, the translation hotline provided by the NYCDOE is used. The PTA is also representative of our student body, and are able to provide translation to most languages in our community If school personnel does not speak the language or if it is a non-cover language, we use google translate to provide a translation - either written or spoken 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Trimester Distribution: Parent Teacher conferences Parent Teacher Conferences IEP Meetings Annual: IEP meetings interpretation service(s)? We have a staff member designated for oral translation for each language in the school. We also have designated written translators on the staff. If that staff member is not available, the translation hotline provided by the NYCDOE is used. The PTA is also representative of our student body, and are able to provide translation to most languages in our community If school personnel does not speak the language or if it is a non-cover language, we use google translate to provide a translation - either written or spoken We have a staff member designated for oral translation for each language in the school. We also have designated written translators on the staff. 9  Family engagement Nights - 2 per year 2 events per month for the families Attendance Meetings 2 concerts per year Guidance meetings Principal Meetings Periodic Distribution: Family engagement nights, attendance meetings,concerts, guidance and principal meetings PTA meetings and events Monthly: PTA Meetings We use over-the-Phone translation for other languages since it is a longer meeting If that staff member is not available, the translation hotline provided by the NYCDOE is used. The PTA is also representative of our student body, and are able to provide translation to most languages in our community If school personnel does not speak the language or if it is a non-cover language, we use google translate to provide a translation - either written or spoken We have a staff member designated for oral translation for each language in the school. We also have designated written translators on the staff. If that staff member is not available, the translation hotline provided by the NYCDOE is used. The PTA is also representative of our student body, and are able to provide translation to most languages in our community If school personnel does not speak the language or if it is a non-cover language, we use google translate to provide a translation - either written or spoken We have a staff member designated for oral translation for each language in the school. We also have designated written translators on the staff. If that staff member is not available, the translation hotline provided by the NYCDOE is used. The PTA is also representative of our student body, and are able to provide 0  translation to most languages in our community If school personnel does not speak the language or if it is a non-cover language, we use google translate to provide a translation - either written or spoken 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 1. Phone calls in native speaking language 2. School Messenger in native and english speaking language - targeted to those families 3. Written and translated communication 4. Over-the-phone translation services Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Chancellors regulation was reviewed at our beginning of the year meeting on September 4, 2018 - It was discussed, distributed, and the staff was provided with the link to the regulations as well. Staff were provided with the translation hotline phone number. Before each Open house, parent teacher conference, open school night, we have a staff meeting to discuss language access. During these times there are options for teachers depending on the language. (1) we have volunteered translators for named languages in one central location so that teachers can call them and they will join the meeting as a translator (2) We provide teachers with the over-the-phone translation information that they can use on speakerphone and (3) We use google translator as a final resort for on the spot difficult translation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 1  At PTA meetings, the parents will be given information on their right to translation and on the translation and interpretation services that are available. They will be given access to these documents. An ENL teacher on each grade level is also responsible for contacting individual parents who he/she has identified as needing this information and will provide it to them. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Each year we send two school-level "blue surveys" to the parents. One section of this survey is dedicated to gathering feedback from parents on translation and language services. The ENL teacher also informally gathers information from families during her individual meetings with the ENL parents. Our PTA is representative of our student body needs, and through conversations and meetings is able to help with written/verbal translations and use parent voice in improvement of these services. 2 
