 27Q317 School Name: WATERSIDE CHILDREN'S STUDIO SCHOOL Principal: DANA GERENDASI   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Waterside Children’s Studio School 27Q317 342700010317 Pre-K – 5th School Number (DBN): 190 Beach 110 th Street Rockaway Park NY 11694 718-634-1344 718-634-3884 Phone Number: Fax: Dana Gerendasi dgerendasi@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dana Gerendasi Email Address: Denise Getchius-Staines Bernice Crespo Melanie Meyerson Christine Leotta N/A DarrahBurns District Information Mary Barton Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd. Ozone Park, NY 11416 mbarton@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5770 Phone Number: 718-348-2994 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 82-01 RockawayBlv. Ozone Park, NY 11416 MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-642-5839 Phone Number: 718-348-2997 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dana Gerendasi Denise Getchius Melissa McAllister Christine Leotta Carolina Cisneros Laura Frank LadaPanksowski *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Stephanie Dobranski Melanie Meyerson MadiaLamontagne Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At the Waterside Children’s Studio School, our mission is to provide a safe and nurturing learning environment where creativity and artistic expression are integral to the academic and emotional success of every child. Through music, drama, visual arts, film, technology, writing and dance, our rigorous and progressive curriculum will empower ALL of our children to grow academically, creatively and socially. They will acquire the critical thinking, personal integrity and self-esteem that go beyond the classroom walls. As a community, we will take pride and ownership of our school and celebrate all of our accomplishments.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school serves students in grades Pre-K - 5th. The student demographics are Asian: 5% | Black: 23% | Hispanic: 48% | White: 21% Student with Special Needs: 22% English Language Learners: 13%. We are a very diverse community celebrating students and their many languages including: English, Spanish, Arabic, Polish, Russian, Chinese, Hebrew, Thai, Bengali, and Hungarian. We also have one Integrated Co-Teaching in every grade from K-5 that uses the Marilyn Friend model for co-teaching in the form of stations. Additionally, we have two self contained bridge classes for K-2 and 3-5. Lastly, we will have an Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) NEST Integrated Co-Teaching program starting in Kindergarten and 1st Grade. We have two English as a New Language (ENL) teachers who use the push in model to work with students who require these services. Both teachers plan with each grade team to form their lessons. Lastly, we have two guidance counselors that support the social and emotional learning needs of all of our students. The programs and partnerships that drive our instruction are as follows : *Teachers College Reading and Writing Project for Pre-K – 5 th Grade *Schoolwide Enrichment Model (SEM) * Go Math K-5 * Building Blocks Math Program for Pre-K *Metamorphosis Math Coaching * Orton Gillingham Coaching for teachers in grades K-2 *Strong arts based offering visual art, music, band, drama and dance *Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS) and Restorative Circles *Monday Professional Learning *Science Technology Engineering Art and Math (STEAM) Curriculum developed for students in grades 2-5 *Station Based Integrative Co-Teaching (ICT) classrooms (Marilyn Friend Model) *STAR period for Response to Intervention (RtI) for students who are struggling in Reading and Writing *Departmentalized 5th Grade - students travel to three classrooms Reading/Science, Writing/Social Studies and Math *Algebra for All (3rd Year) for 5th Grade Math * School Based After School Programs (Basketball, Soccer, 3D Printing, Art Club, Band, Dance Team, and Drama Club) *Student Led Conference Month (January) 0  *An Inclusive English as a New Language (ENL) Program *Strong school/family connection - communication includes: BLOOMZ School Website – watersidecss.org Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/Waterside-Childrens-Studio-School-348728 Curriculum and Coffee with Dana – October Parent Teacher Conferences – September, November and March Student Led Conferences – January Monthly Progress Reports – Oct, Dec, Feb, April, and May Email Monthly Newsletter from Dana Monthly Calendar Phone Blasts Parent Workshops Various school activities throughout the year Art Partnerships and Residencies *Center for Architecture - 4th Grade *Creative Arts Team - Shakespeare Cluster *New York City Ballet - 1st Grade Ballet Tales and 3rd Grade The Nutcracker Project *Guggenheim Museum - 2nd Grade yearlong residency *Little Kids Rock - Music Professional Learning *Disney in School - 5th Grade *Greater Ridgewood Youth Council - 3D Printing *Rockaway Waterfront Alliance - Gardening *The New Museum - 3rd and 5th Grade - Digital Learning 1  School Strengths/Accomplishments ● Meeting Target for student progress, student achievement and closing the achievement gap ● Exceeding Target in School Environment ● Scored a Proficient with Well Developed features on the last Quality Review ● Status of Good Standing for State Accountability ● Strong collaboration amongst the staff grade level and school wide ● Ongoing parent engagement opportunities Challenges Although our students are making significant progress with the Common Core Learning Standards we are still on the lower side when it comes to proficiency in English Language Arts and Math according the New York State Testing results. In grades 3-5, 46% of our students in English Language Arts are proficient (a 10% increase from the 2017 test results). However, in math, we had no change in our proficiency percentage from 2017 and remained at 38% in 2018. Area of Growth In 2018, 38% of our students were proficient in math, which was the same percentage in 2017. Area of Focus Math – Due to the same percentage of proficency of 38% in 2017 and 2018, our focus will be in the following areas: Geometry, Measurement and Data, Fractions, Numbers and Operations in Base 10, Operations and Algebraic Thinking, and Multi Step Problems 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. For the 2018 - 2019 school year, we will be continuing to grow our Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) NEST program in Kindergarten and now 1st Grade. Every grade has one Integrated Co-Teaching class and we have two bridge self contained 12:1:1 classes (K-2 and 3-5). 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We have always had wonderful collaboration as a school, but this year, we have shared even more as evidenced by our differentiated checklists for each grade that teachers from all grades can utilize if they need to. Additionally, as we transition to more project based homework, the teachers have collaborated on great projects that they can give to the students that are holistic, authentic and hands on. We are also proud of our student achievement with regards to 2  students being able to have better academic conversations with one another which has led to great movement of reading levels, more detailed writing and explanation of how they solved math problems, particularly multi-step problems, which continues to be a goal for us as a school. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q317 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 503 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 20 20 21 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 9 20 17 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 72.0% % Attendance Rate 66.6% % Reduced Lunch 11.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 44.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 22.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.25 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 45.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 92% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 68 68 18 93.6% 5.4% 19.5% 23.9% 5.2% 4.2% 2 3% 6.2 37.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2018 Danielson data, overall Measure of Teaching Practice (MOTP) scores in the area of 3b, Questioning and Discussion Techniques, had an average rating of Effective with several teachers receiving developing in this area. We will continue to implement and build upon our very structured inter-visitations and feedback practice that will showcase best practices in all Danielson areas, particularly 3b . As a school community, we have offered and will continue to offer the teachers opportunities to grow in domain 3b. This will be done through various Monday study groups, Teacher's College staff developers, Teacher's College calendar days, Orton Gillingham Coaching, STAR Period through Fountas and Pinnel Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI), Metamorphosis coaching, and classroom inter-visitations to observe best practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 55% of teachers will have made progress to increase their final rating in domain 3b: Questioning and Discussion Techniques of the Danielson Framework as measured by Teachboost and Advance reports. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will be a part of differentiated weekly professional development through Monday’s collaborative professional learning study groups. Various components that make up 3b will be offered in every cycle to teachers if they would like to choose it. Topics are to be determined via our Professional Development committee. Teachers will also receive professional learning support with this domain through Teachers College Reading and Writing project through our staff developers, calendar days and leadership specialty groups. All teachers will be observed through the Danielson Framework with immediate feedback and supports put in place towards mastery of 3b. Response to Intervention (RtI) STAR period (Tier 2) Reading for students who are in the lowest third and overage (holdover) with Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) program, Integrated Co-Teaching classes, SETTS, English as a New Language (ENL) (push in), Reading and Writing Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Tier 3), Math Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and Inquiry, Enrichment Clusters through the Schoolwide Enrichment Model , Imagine Learning, iReady for ELA and Math, PBIS, at risk counseling, and crisis counseling, ENL afterschool, and academic afterschool for students in grades 3-5. Parent workshops on specific topics, Tuesday’s Parent Time, Family Friday, monthly Parent Teacher Association (PTA) meetings, monthly School Leadership Team (SLT) meetings, trips, parent book clubs, parent-teacher conferences, student led conferences in January, and open school nights, Winter and Spring Art Festivals, Enrichment Showcase and back to school activities. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers September 2018– June 2019 Administration, PD committee, students and teachers Students September 2018– June 2019 Administration, students, parents and teachers Parents/families and students September 2018– June 2019 Parents, students, teachers and admin How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 6  We have monthly newsletters that go out to families outlining the units of study for each subject. Teachers send home monthly progress reports on how their children are doing (October, December, February, April, and May). In January, we hold student led conference month where our students in Pre-K - 5th grade share how they met their learning goal and showcase the work around that goal. We have many parent workshops with our families including our Curriculum and Coffee with the Principal where parents meet with the principal to go over the expectations for each of the grades. Our school website has a ton of academic resources available to the families including our pacing calendars for the year, standards, grade philosophies with goals and many other resources available to assist the parent in understanding the Common Core Learning Standards, Next Generation Learning Standards and the programs that we as a school implement in our classrooms. We also use BLOOMZ as our parent communication tool where they have access to our teachers at all times. With BLOOMZ, parents also receive updates throughout the day with pictures, videos and general reminders. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TC staff development and units of study, Orton Gillingham coaching, Teachboost, Monday professional learning cycles, per session funds, per diem so that teachers can attend PD, post observation conferences (if needed), and teacher inter-visitations during the school day, instructional supplies, and ENL support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 65% of the teachers will have engaged in professional learning around domain 3b. This will be evidenced by a PD selection survey, Monday study groups, Teacher's College Specialty Groups, Teacher's College Staff Developers, collaborative planning time with Dana, grade team planning, and teacher feedback survey. 100% of teachers will participate in the feedback survey with our goal of at least 90% of teachers satisfied. We can then formulate glows and grows of our professional learning process and make changes as needed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachboost, Advance, reflections sheets, survey and classroom visits. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the 2016-2017 school survey, 94% of teachers say that adults at this school teach students how to advocate for themselves. In an effort to ensure that more students feel challenged, engaged and supported by their teachers to advocate for themselves academically and socially, we will continue to deepen the teachers learning in this area. A professional learning plan has been developed to differentiate support based on learning need. Teacher teams will bring their grade team learning to our vertically grouped Monday professional learning Study Groups. As a school community, we have always offered our teachers and students a supportive learning environment. Teachers have always had an opportunity to be a part of at least 45 hours of professional development per year through Teacher’s College, monthly professional learning cycles, and math support through Metamorphosis. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 96% of teachers will feel that the students in their classes will have advocated for themselves to support them academically and socially. This work will be evidenced and measured by student work products, assessment data, use of continuum and rubrics, feedback systems (teacher to student and peer to peer), attendance logs with staff developers, project based homework, student led conferences, implementation of restorative circles, various consultants and study groups, Teacher’s College Admission Tickets, and classroom observations documented in Teachboost and Advance. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  To ensure that students advocate for themselves academically and socially, teachers will be a part of differentiated professional development in various content specific areas. One way is through our Monday’s collaborative professional learning study groups. Our professional learning committee will meet before each cycle of PD to come up with topics and study groups based on teacher need. Choices are sent out to teachers via Google Survey and teachers can then choose which study group would meet their professional learning needs. As a Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project school, teachers will also work collaboratively with staff developers to form study groups that will best meet the learning needs of the teachers vertically and by grade. To ensure students advocate for themselves academically and socially, students who need intervention support in reading will be a part of our Response to Intervention (RtI) STAR period (Tier 2 and Tier 3) for students who are in the lowest third and overage (holdover) with Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) program. All teachers, including out of classroom staff, will be trained in the LLI program. Additionally students will feel supported through our Integrated Co Teaching (ICT) classes, SETTS, ENL(push in), Math AIS and Inquiry, Enrichment Clusters through the Schoolwide Enrichment Model , student led conferences, project based homework for grades 3-5, Imagine Learning, iReady for ELA and Math, PBIS, at risk counseling and crisis counseling, implementation of restorative circles, ENL afterschool, and academic afterschool for students in grades 3-5. Students will feel challenged and supported through our home/school connection. We will offer many parent workshops on specific topics, Tuesday’s Parent Time, Family Friday's, monthly Parent Teacher Association (PTA) meetings, monthly School Leadership Team (SLT) meeting, trips, parent book clubs, parent-student conferences, student led conferences in January, and open school nights, Winter and All teachers September 2018– June 2019 PD committee, admin, and teachers Students September 2018– June 2019 Admin, students and teachers Parents/Families and students September 2018– June 2019 Parents/families, students, teachers, and admin 9 Spring Art Festivals, Enrichment Showcase and back to school activities. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We have monthly newsletters that go out to families outlining the units of study for each subject. Teachers send home monthly progress reports on how their children are doing. In January, we hold student led conference month where our students in Pre-K - 5th grade share how they met their learning goal and showcase the work around that goal. We have many parent workshops with our families including our Curriculum and Coffee with the Principal where parents meet with the principal to go over the expectations for each of the grades. Our school website has a ton of academic resources available to the families including our pacing calendars for the year, standards, grade philosophies with goals and many other resources available to assist the parent in understanding the Common Core Learning Standards, Next Generation Learning Standards, and the programs that we as a school implement. We also use BLOOMZ as our parent communication tool where they have access to our teachers at all times. With BLOOMZ, parents also receive updates throughout the day with pictures, videos and general reminders. Lastly, parents understand that we use Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS) as a school and learn all about out Bee Bucks that are given out to our students. Additionally, families will learn about The Leader in Me where we will focus on one new habit per month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher's College staff development and units of study, Teachboost, Monday professional learning cycles, per session for Cabinet and Core Inquiry Team, per diem so that teachers can attend professional development, Restorative Justice/Circles training for staff, The Leader in Me, post observation conferences (if needed), and teacher inter-visitations during the school day, and English as a New Language support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 90% of teachers will provide feedback with satisfaction as to how they feel supported in ensuring that students have advocated for themselves academically and socially. We can then formulate glows and grows of our professional development process and make changes as needed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 0  Teacher survey and observations done in Teachboost, based on the Danielson Framework Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the Quality Review Proficient rating in 2.2 and the continuation to previous work done in using the TC Writing Continuum and collaboratively planned rubrics, there still exists a need to fine tune and deepen teacher’s knowledge in the area of writing assessments, particularly peer to peer assessments . As a result, teachers will continue to use their planning time, inquiry, and professional learning time to modify and make adjustments to each unit of study and lessons based on the results of assessments given to the students so that teachers can meet the needs of all students. As a school community, we have always collaboratively planned out each unit and all the resources that align with the unit. Rubrics and the Teacher's College continuum are resources that we are always looking to improve in to hold our students to the highest academic expectations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 95% of teachers will make progress in the work of using writing assessments effectively. This will be evidenced by collaboratively planned rubrics, checklists, ongoing assessments, feedback (teacher to student and peer to peer), and the Teachers College Reading and Writing Continuum. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  To improve in the use of writing assessments, teacher teams will engage in inquiry to collaboratively analyze student work to adjust teaching practice and instructional planning as well as collaboratively plan Common Core-aligned units with key instructional practices. Teams will examine student work and data to understand gaps in student knowledge or skills and inform the revision of their instructional units. Teachers will be a part of differentiated weekly professional development through Marvelous Monday’s collaborative PD study groups. All teachers will be observed through the Danielson Framework with immediate feedback (through Teachboost and Advance) with professional development suggestions and immediate support put in place. Students will show improvement in the area of writing with the use of writing assessments. This data will be used towards our Response to Intervention (RtI) STAR period (Tier 2 and Tier 3) for students who are in the lowest third and overage (holdover) with Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) program , Integrated Co-Teaching classes, SETSS, English as a New Language (ENL) (push in), Math Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and Inquiry, Enrichment Clusters through the Schoolwide Enrichment Model , ENL afterschool, and academic afterschool for students in grades 3-5 Parents will feel supported in the area of writing through Parent workshops, Tuesday Parent Time, Family Friday's, parent book clubs, parent-student conferences, student led conferences, open school nights, Winter and Spring Art Festivals, participation in trips, Enrichment Showcase, Garden Committee, residency showcases and various school activities. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teachers September 2018– June 2019 Admin and teachers Students and teachers September 2018– June 2019 Admin, students and teachers Parents/Families and students September 2018– June 2019 Parents/families, students, teachers, and admin How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 3  We have monthly newsletters that go out to families outlining the units of study for each subject. Teachers send home monthly progress reports on how their children are doing. In January, we hold student led conference month where our students in Pre-K - 5th grade share how they met their learning goal and showcase the work around that goal. We have many parent workshops with our families including our Curriculum and Coffee with the Principal where parents meet with the principal to go over the expectations for each of the grades. Our school website has a ton of academic resources available to the families including our pacing calendars for the year, standards, grade philosophies with goals and many other resources available to assist the parent in understanding the Common Core Learning Standards, Next Generation Learning Standards and the programs that we as a school implement. We also use BLOOMZ as our parent communication tool where they have access to our teachers at all times. With BLOOMZ, parents also receive updates throughout the day with pictures, videos and general reminders. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TC staff development and units of study, Teachboost, Monday Professional Learning Cycles, per session for Cabinet and Core Inquiry Team, per diem so that teachers can attend Professional Devlopment, post observation conferences (if needed), and teacher inter-visitations during the school day, and English as a New Language (ENL) support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 65% of student writing will be on or above grade level standards as measured by the Teacher's College continuum and student writing. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student work, writing checklists, peer to peer checklists and feedback and writing continuum Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017-2018 Teacher Reflection Sheets, teachers, support staff and administration would like to see an increase in student leadership. After surveying the staff and reading end of year teacher reflection sheets, all teachers will be trained and supported by a research based social emotional program, The Leader in Me, to better support the professional learning of staff that will ultimately increase student leadership schoolwide. This will take place either with facilitation of a study group during Monday Study groups, core inquiry team, coaching, instructional cabinet, PD committee, behavior team, attendance team, parent engagement committee, mentoring and/or special education team. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 95% of teachers and staff will have implemented a research based social emotional program that will encourage student leadership. This will be measured by 100% of teacher feedback sheets, resources created during study groups, observations, and minutes taking at meetings. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  To implement our student leadership goal, our PD committee has been put in place to meet before each cycle of PD to come up with study groups based on teacher need and interest. Facilitators will be selected to run these PD groups so that leadership goals can be met. Leadership is also built in through the various committees including instructional cabinet, inquiry team, behavior/crisis team, special ed team, attendance team, and Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS) team. Highly effective teacher leadership is needed to ensure that our Response to Intervention (RTI) STAR period (tier 2 and tier 3) is a success. Additionally, various leadership opportunities impact our Integrated Co-Teaching classes, SETSS, English as a New Language (ENL) (push in/pull out), , math Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and Inquiry, Enrichment Clusters through the Schoolwide Enrichment Model. Teacher leaders with student leaders will run parent workshops on specific topics as well as be an integral part of Family Friday's, monthly Parent Teacher Association (PTA) meetings, School Leadership Team (SLT) meetings, parent book clubs, parent conferences, garden committee, student led conferences, and open school nights, and various school activities throughout the year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers and all students September 2018 - June 2019 PD Committee, admin, and teachers Students and teachers September 2018- June 2019 Admin, students and teachers Parents/Families and students September 2018 - June 2019 Admin, students and teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We have monthly newsletters that go out to families outlining the units of study for each subject. Teachers send home monthly progress reports on how their children are doing. In January, we hold student led conference month where our students in Pre-K - 5th grade share how they met their learning goal and showcase the work around that goal. We have many parent workshops with our families including our Curriculum and Coffee with the Principal where parents meet with the principal to go over the expectations for each of the grades. Our school website has a ton of academic resources available to the families including our pacing calendars for the year, standards, grade philosophies with goals and many other resources available to assist the parent in understanding the CCLS and The 6  Next Generation Learning Standards and the curriculum's that we as a school follow. We also use BLOOMZ as our parent communication tool where they have access to our teachers at all times. With BLOOMZ, parents also receive updates throughout the day with pictures, videos and general reminders. Parents understand that we use PBIS as a school and learn all about out Bee Bucks that are given out to our students. Lastly, families will learn about The Leader in Me where we will focus on one new habit per month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monday study group cycles, Teacher's College staff development and units of study, Teachboost, per session for instructional cabinet and inquiry team, per diem so that teachers can attend professional development, post observation conferences (if needed), teacher inter-visitations and English as a New Language (ENL) support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of teachers will participate in an in house survey on professional learning study groups and student leadership opportunities. We will also use this data to track the different kinds of leadership roles students have been engaged in. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Historically, the PS 317 community works very hard to increase parent involvement every year. We as a school improve every year, however there is always a need to increase involvement even more. According to parent sign in sheets from the 2017-18 school year, approximately 85% of our families participated in at least two P.S. 317 events. We offer our families many ways that they can be involved in their child's learning that will allow us to continue to build on our already strong school/family partnership. Events include: Workshops, arts festivals (Winter and Spring), enrichment showcases, parent book clubs, Family Friday's, Parent Teacher Association (PTA) sponsored events, parent teacher conferences, student led conferences in January, culminating activities through residencies, field trips, fundraisers, science/STEAM fairs, multicultural celebrations, curriculum and coffee for every grade with the principal in October, attendance celebrations, stepping up ceremonies, attendance breakfast, end of year dance festival and after school club performances. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 87% of parents/guardians will attend at least three school events as documented by sign in sheets. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Family Friday's - First Friday of every month where parents work collaboratively with their children and teacher in their classrooms. Winter and spring arts festivals offered in December and May as well as our Enrichment Showcase celebrating each cycle of our Enrichment Clusters through the Schoolwide Enrichment Model (SEM). Family workshops - offered to parents throughout the year given by teachers, principal and parent coordinator. English as a New Language (ENL) parent classes starting in January and ending in June. Open school night and parent conferences offered in September, November, March and May. Student led conferences for Pre-K - 5th grade throughout the month of January. Response to Intervention STAR period (tier 2 and tier 3), Integrated Co-Teaching classes, SETSS, English as a New Language (ENL) (push in/pull out), math academic interventions services and Inquiry, Enrichment Clusters through the Schoolwide Enrichment Model, iReady for English Language Arts (ELA) and Math for all students in grades 3-5, Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS), at-risk counseling, crisis counseling, ENL after school, academic after school for students in grades 3-5, and after school clubs. We send home monthly progress reports with our formalized grading policy so that our school continuously communicates how their child is doing in school and can reference the grading policy to check if their child is on, below, or above grade level. Lastly, newsletters are sent out monthly explaining to parents what the students are working on in every subject. Our school website holds all important information including a calendar for school events and important school information. Family Friday's, student led conferences in January, Winter and Spring Art Festivals, Enrichment Showcases, Parent Workshops taught by teachers, admin and parent coordinator, Curriculum and Coffee with the Principal during the month of October, Parent/Teacher Conferences, After School Club Performances, Residency culminating activities, Stepping Up Ceremonies in June for Pre-K, Kindergarten and 5th Grade. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents, guardians, and Students September 2018- June 2019 Admin, parents and guardians, parent coordinator and teachers Parents, guardians and students September 2018-June 2019 Admin, parents and guardians, parent coordinator and teachers Parents, guardians and students September 2018-June 2019 Admin, parents and guardians, parent coordinator and teachers 9  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Millennium Development Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tuesday parent time, student led conferences in January, Family Friday's (first Friday of every month), Winter and Spring Arts Festivals, residency showcases, family yoga, various parent workshops offered in the morning and evening, enrichment cluster showcase, class trips, class celebrations, and PTA events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 86% of parents will have attended at least two school events. This will be evidenced by parent sign in sheets and/or parent surveys. For families that have not attended events, administration, parent coordinator and/or teachers will begin to reach out to those specific families. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets and parent surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment through running records Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Leveled Literacy Intervention LLI RtI – STAR period (Tier 2 When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tier 1 groups – with the classroom teacher during the groups on each grade) Fountas and Pinnell Guided Reading school day Ongoing reading assessment after each cycle of STAR RtI with LLI Orton Gillingham AIS teacher for Tier 2 and 3 Intervention Tier 2 groups – STAR period Small group instruction in push in and pull out and AIS teacher during the Newsela Wilson Fundations, Google Classroom with Read Works Words Their Way One to one conferring Differentiated materials At Risk SETSS Imagine Learning for students in the lowest third and English Language Learners On Demand Writing Pieces with Continuum and grade designed rubric. Words in Action SchoolwideEnrichment Model - Friday Enrichment Clusters/STEAM Clusters with Makerspace Academic after school school day Tier 3 groups – AIS teacher during the school day After school program groups for grade 3-5 and ELL’s NYiReadyavailable to students in grades 3-5 during the school day and at home 1 Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Writing Continuum Go Math Differentiated Differentiated Small group classroom instruction (ongoing) After school program for students in grades 3-5. program using Common Observations and small groups Core Coach, New York Ready and Mathematics IReadyonline program for whole school Epic End of year math assessments (June 2015) combined with beginning of the year math assessments (September 2015) Unit Math Assessment (monthly) Math centers (ongoing) Tasks and Assignments (ongoing) STEAM Academic After School Departmentalized Math for 5th Grade iReadyonline support for students in Grades K-5 Engage New York AIS with resource room teacher for Tier 3 (8-10 week cycle) IReadyonline support for whole school Exemplars At risk SETSS ST Math Observations and small groups (ongoing) SchoolwideEnrichment Model - Friday Enrichment Clusters/STEAM Clusters with Makerspace Small math groups during the school day. At risk SETSSand AIS for students struggling in Math during the school day NY iReadyavailable to students in grades K-5th during the school day and at home Math Enrichment Cluster based on student choice during the school day on Friday's 2  Science School day instruction Differentiated materials Small group instruction One to one conferring Project based work Student work products MakerspacePortfolios Portfolios Observations Academic After school At risk AIS Amplify Science Coach Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Common Core Library SchoolwideEnrichment Model - Friday Enrichment Clusters STEAM Centers through Makerspace STEAM Social Studies Student work products Department of Education (DOE) Scope and Sequence NYCPassport to Social Studies Differentiated materials Common Core Library Portfolios Small group instruction Observations Leveled Social Studies School day instruction 3  One to one conferring Project based work Small groups during the school day – different After school clubs inBasketball, soccer, 3D Printing, STEAM, Drama, Visual Art, Band and Dance focuses for different groups SchoolwideEnrichment Model - Friday Enrichment Clusters/STEAM Clusters with Makerspace Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Department of Education (DOE) Scope and Sequence Intervention (topic appropriate) books Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS) Restorative Justice Circles/ Team Time Restorative Justice Circles/Team Time One on one counseling Cozy Corner area in every classroom At risk guidance support offered to students during the school day. At risk academic support offered by AISand SETSSteachers during the school day. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Behavior Plans Interventions Checklist At Risk Behavior Assessment of Lagging Skills and Unsolved Problems Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS) Both small group and Student Leadership Opportunities - The Leader in Me and Student Council The Leader in Me individual sessions listed above will be intervention provided to students focusing on social 4  LST – Name referred to Learning Support Team Restorative JusticeCircles/Team Time Anecdotals and observations from teacher with classroom interventions attempted/mastered and not mastered. and emotional coping skill, feelings, character education, and career awareness Crisis intervention Superhero Enrichment Cluster 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 30 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. At risk counseling, school staff trained in McKinney Vento, setting aside Title 1 STH funds in Galaxy, school based social worker working with families, at risk academic services if needed, provide school supplies and school uniform, assist families to ensure free lunch, if the child comes in with an IEP - ensuring that all mandated services are given to the student, organize bussing for student if needed, and provide the families with information and resources with regards to outside services offered. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. - Hiring Committee comprised of teachers and administration is formed – Applicants interested in our school must be licensed in the specific needed area and cleared by the NYC DOE New Teacher Finder or available through the Open Market Transfer System. - For the interview, the applicant must do a writing sample, bring a portfolio for the interview, look at student work and give immediate feedback and a demonstration lesson. - New Teachers that are hired are assigned a school based mentor. Mentors have been trained by The New Teacher Center. Mentors model demo lessons, provide 1:1 feedback, support with classroom environment and help with writing lesson plans. Mentors will log their support given into the Mentor Tracking System. - School wide professional development plan through our Monday study groups – Collaborative study groups are organized by teacher need and interest. - Teachers will also get support from Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project through staff developers and calendar days. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). WCSS Professional Development Plan General PD Offerings ● Monday Differentiated Study Groups ● TC Staff Developers (20 days) 8  ● TC Calendar Days (25 tickets) ● TC Specialty Groups and Inquiry Team ● ICT Coaching for ICT classrooms, ENL and SETTS teacher (to learn the push in model) through Goldmansour and Rutherford  NEST Coaching and Support through NYU  Orton Gillingham training through Literacy for Life ● Ongoing Math support through Go Math PD and Metamorphosis ● Bi-Monthly grade team meetings with administration ● Google Docs – Curriculum Maps and additional resources ● Putting in place the reading and writing continuum – will be put on PD survey ● Walkthroughs, feedback (Danielson Framework) and observations will help determine next steps for teacher’s learning – which will reflect teachers individual PD plan ● New Teacher/Struggling Teacher PD Plan with mentor support ● Inter-visitations to classrooms with a specific lens ● Literacy and math coaches will work with the teacher(s) to ensure that best practices are being used ● IEP teacher/coordinators will work with special education teachers who need support with working with students who have special needs ● PD action plan with administration (if needed) Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 9  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● Open House for parents interested in Pre-K and Kindergarten ● Pre-K Curriculum Maps shared whole school via Google Docs with collaborative feedback ● School year kickoff in August where all teachers and parents gather at the school to do fun activities and to meet teachers and students ● Pre-K teachers and paras are vertically grouped in with other grades for our Marvelous Monday’s PD study groups ● Workshops for parents – Getting your child ready for Kindergarten ● In June, time is set aside for teachers of previous grades to meet with teachers of future grades to pass over cumulative portfolio, records and to discuss students strengths and next steps including what support services they need or are going to need 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● MOSL committee to decide what MOSL tool to use for student assessment ● PD committee to collaborate on what study groups will be offered for that particular cycle and which teacher and/or para will facilitate that group. ● Inquiry Team will work together to pinpoint a particular data focus through assessments and work vertically to improve that specific area. ● Grade Teams will meet at least twice a week to collaborate on lessons, materials, assessments and resources that will be used for their classes. ● Instructional Cabinet comprised of grade team leaders will meet twice a month to work together on issues around instruction and behavior. The cabinet will look at student work and assessments to gain an understanding of student need. Additionally, the cabinet will oversee that systems are in place with each grade team and that all teachers needs are being met to ensure that students are receiving what they need to be successful. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 0  each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, part 4b Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 196,431 Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 17,533 12,366 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,093,861 X X X X 5B, part 4b 5C, part 4b 5D part 4b 5E part 4b 5A, part 4b 5B, part 4b 5C, part 4b 5D part 4b 5E part 4b 5A, part 4b 5B, part 4b 5C, part 4b 5D part 4b 5E part 4b 5A, part 4b 5B, part 4b 5C, part 4b 5D part 4b 5E part 4b 1  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 2  representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Waterside Children’s Studio School – P.S. 317, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Waterside Children’s Studio School – P.S. 317 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 4  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 30th of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; 5  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand.= School-Parent Compact (SPC) Waterside Children’s Studio School – P.S. 317 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; 6  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 7  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 8  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 47 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: accessible accessible accessible after school The Title III plan is designed to service all immigrant students, who may or may not be ELLs, regardless of grade or proficiency level. Morning programs during our STAR period Monday - Friday from 8:00 - 8:30 are for newcomers/beginners with the lowest NYSITELL/NYSESLAT raw scores (12 students in this group) and for immigrant students to build knowledge about their new surroundings. Topics include U.S. history, cultural norms and acceptable social behaviors. The ENL teachers are responsible for creating the curriculum that engages these students in becoming proficient in their new language(if applicable) and new home. The STAR program begins in October and continues to the last week of school in June. The group is also comprised of SIFE students and those with limited proficiency in their native language. Modifications are made to their STAR curriculum based on new language ability, as well as their reading and writing levels. The instruction also focuses on content rich vocabulary and fluency, as well as grammar mechanics. Instruction is given in English and each group will meet for 30 minutes everyday. We are currently working with Level Literacy Intervention materials and the Scholastic Guided Reading program. Picture dictionaries, guided reading book sets, material from the leveled literacy intervention program (LLI), tape recorders, listening centers, large print books, and manipulatives are readily accessible to all the students. Periodic assessments are given throughout the STAR program to check reading levels as well as oral and writing proficiency. There is an ENL after school program for all ELLs, including immigrant students, on Fridays (2:20 p.m.-3:30 p.m.). The program is open to all current and former ELLs in grades K-5. All subgroups (SIFE, SWD, long-term ELLs, newcomers, non-ELLs, former ELLs, etc.) are included in the after school program. Recent studies have shown that these particular student groups need more supplemental instruction in social and academic language development. All students from the STAR program also take part in test preparation (Test Prep), working to improve proficiency in all modalities-reading, writing, speaking and listening. ELLs take part in small group instruction, guided reading, interactive writing activities, one on one conferences and engage in grammar-related tasks that correspond to the common core language standards. All general and special education teachers who instruct the test preparation program are aided by two ENL certified teachers. There are 9 groups, 3 groups for grades 3, 4 and 5. They are divided by skill level and language proficiency. Resources that are used include Engage NY for reading comprehension, Imagine Learning, grammar activities, listening centers, and additional small group activities that target oral language development (accountable talk, socratic circle, etc.). The Test Prep program runs from December to the first week of April. Instruction in 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information all Title III programs are in English and given by our 2 certified ENL teachers. The program runs from the second week in January to the last week in March. For our Test Prep and STAR programs, attendance sheets are given out to each teacher at the beginning of the session and collected by the assistant principal. Attendance records are kept in the main office. For our ENL after school program, the lead ENL teacher takes attendance at the beginning of every after school session. All attendance records are kept by the lead ENL teacher and stored in a secure location. For all program notifications, the parent coordinator or the language access coordinator is responsible for translating all documents in the parents' preferred languages. Any folllow-up to parent communication will be done through letters or phone-calls in the parents' preferred languages. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: There are various professional development opportunities for our certified ENL teacher. Teachers will be a part of ENL study groups through our Marvelous Monday PD cycle. Topics for Marvelous Monday PD cycle include bridging the gap between 2nd and 3rd grade, how to engage students through technology and classroom management. All topics include a component that address cultural awareness and how to create a welcoming environment for our immigrant and ELL students, implementing culturally sensitive materials in their instruction. The PD cycles run every 6 weeks, from October to mid December, January to mid February, March to the end of April and May to June. There are 4 PD cycles throughout the school year. Each cycle, all teachers are grouped by interest. The PDs are led by one volunteer teacher who has expert knowledge on the particular topic. Both ENL teachers are to lead at least one workshop through the year. Twice a year, there is a full day (8:30am-3:00pm) Teacher's College workshop that addresses the writing and reading challenges facing ELLs in general education classrooms and how to scaffold and differentiate instruction within the TC curriculum across all grades. Every month, the BFSC holds a full day ENL meeting, for all ENL teachers/administrators. These meetings also address difficulties ELLs face in each modality-reading, writing, listening and speaking. They are tailored to address specific issues by school, as well as, train teachers and administrators to run and maintain an effective ENL program. Compliance issues are also discussed during these meetings. The Department of Education Office of ELLs hold monthly workshops that cover a wide range of topics, as well as, introduce new, innovative programs that benefit our growing population of ELLs. These workshops are full day workshops (8:30am-3:00pm). Schedule permitting, our certified ENLs teacher will alternately be sent to one of these workshops bi-monthly. The ENL teachers will also receive PD 2 -3 times in the year through Goldmansour and Rutherford on how to incorporate station teaching within a push in model in ENL classrooms. All agendas and attendance sheets are maintained in the teacher's individual files. Copies are given to the teachers to maintain their own records. All teacher files are kept in the principal's office. 2  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents are an integral part of the learning process, including new language acquisition. On the second Tuesday of every month (October through June), we will hold a parent workshop for parents of immigrant students to cover a range of topics that the parents selected through our workshop survey. The survey is given to all parents at the beginning of the school year (second week in September). Currently, the topics that will be addressed are: how to motivate immigrant students to engage in school culture (October), writing strategies that both parent and child can use in their daily lives (November), how to become an active and willing participant in the school community (December), the tools to become a U.S. citizen (April) and how to prepare our students for the state exams (February). It will rotate accordingly. The fourth Tuesday of every month (2:30pm-3:30pm), there will be a workshop that addresses parent concerns about immigrant students academic progress. It is a forum where all parents can voice their concerns over school related issues such as homework, assessments, classroom behavior, etc. Parents will be notified a week before the workshop through letters being sent home and phone calls. Sepcial requests by parents who speak language other than Spanish are fulfilled by the ENL teacher through our relationship with the Translation & Interpretation Unit. We also have community members who are certified in providing language services to our parents of speakers of languages other than Spanish (Polish, Bengali, Russian, Arabic). Our certified 2 ENL teachers will run the workshops, along with our bilingual parent coordinator. All communication to our parents are sent in their preferred language. The workshops will be held monthly until the end of the school year. Parents will be notified about the program in their native language translated by staff members and the DOE translation unit. All attendance sheets and agendas are kept in the parent coordinator's office in a secure area. Original copies of parent notifications, invitations, etc. are kept in the same location. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services 3  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Queens District 27 School Name Waterside Children's Studio School School Number 317 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dana Gerendasi Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Katherine Morales Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Katie McGillicuddy Coach type here School Counselor Daniel Garcia Parent type here Parent Coordinator Zoraida Quiles Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 436 5 Total number of ELLs 47 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.78%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The school uses Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP). The teachers use Fountas and Pinnell, MOSLs, teacher created assessments, Go Math performance tasks, readng and writing on demand tasks. We are also using Imagine Learning, which tracks the reading progress of our newcomers and struggling readers. Currently, ELLs have made vast improvements in speaking and reading in English. Our first and fifth grade ELLs are worked on identifying and using letter sounds to figure out tricky words, using word families to understand rhyming, developing better fluency, which is a common weakness among all ELLs across all grade. Using Words Their Way, we have seen newcomer ELLs start to develop basic vocabulary that will help them write a range of fiction and non fiction pieces. Older ELLs are struggling with using academic vocabulary effectively, showcasing an understanding of the concepts taught. With this data, teachers will plan how to translate the successess in reading into making ELLs better writers. Improvements must be made in writing in English. With TCRWP, the focus will be 6  placed on developing better writers. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Scheduling, materials, planning time and professional development 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the ELL programs are evaluated through the NYSESLAT Data, the NYS exams, the student’s individual success in all content areas (progress reports and report cards) and informal assessments from the ENL instructors. Also, running records, on-demand writing assessments, individual conferences with each student, test and quizzes in all content areas all help the staff determine the success of the ENL program and, most importantly, the ELLs themselves. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Scheduling, materials, planning time and professional development 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school uses all documents from the ELL identification process, which includes the HLIS, the results from the NYSITELL and previous NYSESLAT results (if applicable), the results from the LENS (to determine SIFE status), and any student work in English and in their native language. Along with recommendations made by their ENL and general education teachers and consent from the parents, the students are placed in an appropriate RTI group, which consists of no more that 5 ENL students. The purpose is to create a comfortable environment where the students connect and share similar academic and language difficulties. All progress is tracked on a STAR tracker, accessible by all teachers of ELLs. Learner characteristics are noted by the teacher and materials/resources are planned accordingly, mostly focusing on more visual support and vocabulary development. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. As mentioned earlier, students are having difficulty when it comes to writing. Almost all of the ELLs in across alll grades have made improvements in speaking in English. Our first grade ELLs have had difficulty with listening, regardless of proficiency level. Our first and fifth grade ELLs have risen 1 or more reading level. Writing has now become our focus, trying to translate reading success into writing success. ELLs in kindergarten are having difficulty in speaking, according to the NYSITELL. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Scheduling, materials, time for planning and professional development Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 7  The school currently uses the Push-in/ organizational models for ENL. For the push-in model, students are placed in heterogeneous groups in grades K-4. The ENL teacher provides supplemental instruction to what the students are learning in that particular content area/ curriculum. The ENL teacher for 5th grade groups ELLs homogeneously. For the pull-out model, the students in grades K-5 are pulled out in their homogeneous groups. They remain in their same grade group. This is to ensure that all ELLS are receiving their mandated time. When ELLs were placed in their general education classes, they were grouped by grade, not by proficiency level. It is only during their pull out ENL sessions when they are grouped by their proficiency, 45% of their ENL session throughout the school year. When the ENL teachers push into the classrooms during most of the week, they work will all ELLs within that particular class in that particular grade, regardless of proficiency level. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Most of the ELLs are placed in one classroom for each grade, which makes pushing in more feasible. The ENL teachers provides 4 periods a week for each grade/class, as well as pull out entering and emerging students for additional periods. Students who are at the entering and emerging levels are pulled out from reading and/or writing periods to receive language services. Kindergarten, first and second grade have lunch together, while third, fourth and fifth grade have lunch together during the fifth period. The ENL teacher is provided with the school prep schedule, as well as individual class schedules to create an ENL schedule that will best accommodate the students and the teachers. This insures that all ELLs receive their mandated instructional minutes. Entering and emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction during the week, which equates to about seven (7) periods a week. Transitioning and expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction during the week, which equates to three and a half (3 ½) periods a week. The instruction times for ELA (180 minutes) for transitioning and expanding ELLs are satisfied through their ELA instruction with their general education teacher. The ENL teacher works collaboratively with the general education teacher during the 3 and 1/2 periods for all leveled ELLs. For a breakdown on program schedules, please refer to ELL Programs under ELL Demographics. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. For each content area, vocabulary development is a major focus. Dependent upon the content area in which the ENL teachers push into, the students will be able to breakdown the actual language of the given text, activity or task of the day and begin with vocabulary. Also, ELLs are given an opportunity to participate in peer tutoring within the classroom. Entering and emerging ELLs team up with transitioning and commanding ELLs to exchange ideas and reach an understanding of the day’s concept(s). Manipulatives are readily available and often used in every content area. Whenever possible, demonstrations of the lesson help ELLs understand and participate in group discussion, eventually guiding them into broader, whole class discussions. Activities where ELLs can move around and interact with other students have been proven to be most effective for ELLs. All ENL instructional approaches and methods are guided by NYS regulations. This school has adopted the Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Workshop model, which currently dictates how ELA is delivered in each grade. We are using Go Math to guide our math curriculum for grades K-5. Science and social studies curriculum are guided by scope & sequence. Common Core Learning standards also play a role in ENL instruction. Translation services are provided to our ELLs by the ENL teacher or any other language support staff, in conjunction with content area delivery. The ENL teachers works in conjunction with the general education in all content areas. The ENL teachers work with small groups of ELLs within the classroom during a given content area lesson/task. The ENL teachers also develop ELL-friendly tasks that addresses the teaching point and helps them reach the goal of the lesson. If and when the school implements a transitional bilingual program, the bilingual teacher 8  will provide all instruction, with assistance from the ENL teachers when students reach more proficiency in English during their third year in the program. This is the same structure in place if and when we implement a dual language program. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Free standing ENL is the program implemented here at this school. The only assessment given in a student's native language is the Spanish LAB, which is administered by the ENL teachers. One of our ENL teachers is bilingual and is currently the only person able to assess students in their native language, if it is Spanish or French. Currently, there are no other formal assessments given in the student's native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE: When a SIFE student returns to school, they are given a brief informal assessment of their basic skills and knowledge of English. The student is reintroduced to the classroom environment through displaying language and content objectives and presenting information in varied ways (written, demonstrations, manipulatives). Once the student feels comfortable in their classroom environment, they follow the structured ELL program that is currently in place. If there is a need for extra tutoring, the ESL teacher meets with the student’s content teacher and discusses areas for improvement and possible meetings for the student. b. Newcomers: ELLs who are in US schools less than 3 years take part in a newcomers program their first year. The main focus here is to adapt to the classroom environment, develop their basic English vocabulary and begin Fundations with their content area teacher and with the ESL teacher. After their first year, the program changes to fit the student, addressing any academic weaknesses. Focus is now placed on utilizing the skills acquired in their first year to develop stronger abilities as a reader and writer of English. c. Developing: Students participate in their chosen ESL program, working with the ESL teacher on developing stronger reading and writing skills. At this point, most ELLs are either advanced or proficient in the listening and speaking modalities. All four modalities are addressed in most activities, but deficiencies are more prevalent in reading and writing in English. Making predictions, inferences, brainstorming lists, asking questions about the text help ELLs understand the material. Making outlines, creating charts and using graphic organizers are evident in ESL instruction. d. Long Term ELLs: Looking at data and conferencing with content area teachers will help create a profile for these ELLs. If needed, teachers will arrange tutoring sessions throughout the school day to pinpoint and address any issue the student is having with a particular concept/content area. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELLs engage students in accountable talk, shared and guided reading, shared and interactive writing, as well as provide the entire class with leveled libraries and various differentiated materials for all ELLs, targeted their different proficiency levels. Each class is provided with listening centers where students can develop their English listening skills. Currently, we are working under the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Workshop model so vast amounts of time are dedicated to reading and writing, while developing academic language. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Common Core Learning Standards are aligned with the curriculum maps for each grade. Teachers have unspiraled the math program to target diverse types of learners, including our ELLs. All service providers, along with general education and ENL 9  teachers meet once a week to discuss scheduling conflicts and instructional practices that work or don’t work for ELL-SWDs and how to move forward in their progress. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Currently, the school offers AIS for three weeks, at-risk SETTS for 6 weeks, speech, and at-risk guidance. Intervention programs are determined through a process which starts with the teacher completing an intervention form, stating the difficulty (ies) the student is having. It is brought up at a LST (Learning Support Team) meeting where the special education coordinator, the SETTS teacher, and the SBST (School Based Support Team) discuss the appropriate steps to take and recommend an intervention program. All intervention services are offered in English. The SETTS teacher, guidance counselor and a general education provides these intervention services. After school tutoring is available. Currently, all support services are offered in English. If a bilingual service provider is needed, the school will contract one from another school or DOE approved agency. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the upcoming school year, there will be a NYSESLAT prep after school program, in which we will provide additional help in listening, speaking, reading and writing in English. There will be an adult ESL class after school where the parents of ELLs can utilize the language skills acquired in this class to help their children at home. The school will continue their after-school test prep program for 3rd, 4th and 5th grade. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently, there are no programs that will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students, including ELLs, are welcome to any program. Millennium, the after school program, provides entertaining activities for the students, as well as homework help. ELLs are also encouraged to audition for the school band, as well as, participate in art and dance clubs after-school, hosted by the school's art teacher and dance teacher respectively. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs have access to the student computer lab and class library. In addition, they are encouraged to come to the resource room, where they can participate in the listening center, select books catered to them in the ENL library, create project-based artwork in the art center, and meet with ENL staff. Regardless of grade and proficiency level, all ELLs have this privilege. They also receive NYSESLAT prep books according to their grade. We are currently using Moving into English, which is divided by grade. For the various proficiency levels, beginners and intermediates have access to level-appropriate audio books to develop stronger listening and reading skills. Advanced students have access to tape recorders to develop their speaking skills. Books are grouped by levels and genre, which cater to an ELL’s individual reading level and interest. Currently, we are developing an extensive bilingual library in all classrooms. Teachers and students will have access to English-Spanish books in various genres and levels. We are adding new titles everyday and are incorporating them in their daily classroom assignments/tasks. All these resources and materials are available to all ELL subgroups, regardless of proficiency level, background, etc. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? With freestanding ENL, the only language spoken is English. The ENL teacher can provide translation services (Spanish) personally or through the DOE, if needed. There aren’t any textbooks that cater to any ELL’s native language in any content area. Typically, ELLs are given assistance by the ENL teacher of any other language support staff. There are also bilingual books in all classrooms to help ELLs with their second language acquisition. 0  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ELLs receive services based on their proficiency through their mandated times. Each grade receives a number of ENL sessions in accordance with the mandated time, as well as the number of ELLs within a specific grade. ELLs receive support through all content areas by the ENL teachers. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELLs have access to the student computer lab and class library. In addition, they are encouraged to come to the resource room, where they can participate in the listening center, select books catered to them in the ENL library, create project-based artwork in the art center, and meet with ENL staff. Regardless of grade and proficiency level, all ELLs have this privilege. They also receive NYSESLAT prep books according to their grade. We are currently using Moving into English, which is divided by grade. For the various proficiency levels, beginners and intermediates have access to level-appropriate audio books to develop stronger listening and reading skills. Advanced students have access to tape recorders to develop their speaking skills. Books are grouped by levels and genre, which cater to an ELL’s individual reading level and interest. Currently, we are developing an extensive bilingual library in all classrooms. Teachers and students will have access to English-Spanish books in various genres and levels. We are adding new titles everyday and are incorporating them in their daily classroom assignments/tasks. All these resources and materials are available to all ELL subgroups, regardless of proficiency level, background, etc. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In the upcoming school year, we plan to create a summer workshop for newcomers before entering school. They will be introduced to staff, take a tour of the school and participate in activities that will make them feel at home with their new environment. The parent coordinator participates in all these activities, as well, to familiarize herself with the students and their families. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, there are no language electives available to students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In addition to professional development workshops held at the school every Monday, all ELL personnel participate in Teacher’s College Workshops once a month, as well as ELL meetings held by the district and borough assessment office. There are DOE sponsored workshops where teachers are sent to gather information on best practices in all areas, ranging from literacy to math achievement for ELLs. Also, the ENL staff takes part in the school wide inquiry team. The purpose of the school cabinet is to discuss instructional strategies and methods that would address any academic difficulties for all students, including ELLs. Those on the LAP team are required to attend ELL-specific workshops, including the principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator, ESL teacher, guidance counselor and at least one content area teacher. 1  Teachers of ELLs are offered ENL centered workshops through TC and other colleges/universities. They take part in multi-day studies where they range from literacy to math development with a focus on language development. One general education teacher from each grade also attends ENL centered studies once a month and turn-key for the rest of their grade team. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ESL staff must attend each individual grade level meeting once a month to discuss ELL progress and how the content area teachers can further develop the students academic and language proficiency. The meetings are designed to enable communication between the principal and pedagogues about various topics, including transitioning students into middle school. The building is shared by another school, the other being a middle school. They provide insight and information as to how we can help our students’ transition into middle school. The guidance counselors from both schools meet with the 5th grade teachers, ENL teachers and parents of ELLs at least twice in the fall and once in the spring to discuss the academic, social and emotional support available for this transition. Parents are also encouraged to call the school to speak with the guidance counselor, ENL teacher or parent coordinator one on one. There are weekly professional development workshops held for all teachers at the school. The ELL training workshops take place once a month. They address topics ranging from literacy, informal and formal assessments to translating NYSESLAT data into effective instruction for all levels. If they attend workshops outside of the school, documentation must be received (certificates) and given to the principal. They will be placed in that individual's file to keep track of all professional development workshops attended. Teachers maintain copies of documents of the PD (agendas, certificates, etc.) for future reference. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The Parent Teacher Association (PTA) is open to any and all parents of students, including ELLs. ELL meetings are held once a month for parents who inquire about instruction, assessment, curriculum and how to help their students acquire the language at home. Parents are welcome to Family Fridays, which are held once a month. They are invited to sit with their child and participate in the activity of that day. The ESL teacher provides translation in Spanish and French when needed. If a parent needs translation in any other language, interpreters are made available to us through the Translation and Interpretation unit or any DOE approved agency. In addition, parents are sent invitations to meet with their children's ESL teacher to discuss their language development, any current assessment results across all content areas and any next steps that the students should take to ensure success in their new language. These individual meetings are usually held every Tuesday at 2:30 pm. Accommodations are made for parents who cannot meet at these times. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs are invited to participate in all events held by the PTA, including movie nights, holiday themed events, and fundraisers. Parents are asked to volunteer a number of hours to work various events held after the school day. The parent coordinator hosts a monthly book club for all parents to encourage parents to read with their children, promoting a commitment to our students' literacy development. 2  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dana Gerendasi, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Waterside Children's Studio Sc School DBN: 27Q317 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dana Gerendasi Title Principal Katie McGillicuddy Assistant Principal Zoraida Quiles Parent Coordinator Katherine Morales ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Daniel Garcia School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q317 School Name: Waterside Children's Studio School Superintendent: Mary Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Katherine Morales ENL Teacher Yes No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All information pertaining to the preferred languages of families in our community are gathered from the Home Language Identification Survey, blue emergency cards for students in K-5, contact information sheet from our Pre-K families, and parent surveys conducted during parent teacher conferences. Informally, the same information is gathered from informal conferences with the parents and written and oral request from parents. Home language information is retained on ATS and in the students' cumulative records. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 6 Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish - 100% Spanish Spanish - 100% Arabic Spanish Arabic Russian Bengali Spanish Arabic Polish Russian Bengali Ukrainian Urdu Portuguese Chinese 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families Monthly newsletters by grade -at the first Monday of every month Parent teacher conference announcements-2 weeks before parent teacher conferences Various throughout the year translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Staff members, translation and interpretation 7 unit, The Big Word After school program information for band, art and dance-1 week before the commencement of the after school programs Flyers for PTA events and meetings-1 to 2 weeks about the PTA event or meeting New York State Testing dates-1 st Monday in March School closures-holidays and 1/2 school days- 1week before the school closing or 1/2 school days School's monthly calendar-the last Friday of the previous month Grade wide field trip permission slips-2 weeks before the day of the field trip 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Staff members, translation and interpretation unit, The Big Word Parent teacher conferences Curriculum night in September Various throughout the year. Progress meetings for select students (promotion in doubt) - beginning after the 1 st parent teacher conference, Student Led Conferences Parent meetings held every Tuesday Parent Coordinator workshops (Book club)-held once a month, Monthly ENL parent meetings 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Translated letters, staff members who speak various languages, over the phone translation with TNI unit, family member support and outside agencies 8  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Trainings, refreshers, professional development Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school has provided signs in the main languages that parents have requested near the security desk and in the main office. If a language is not covered and there is not a staff member able to translate, signs, letters and other materials are sent to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation. Parents are provided with a pamphlet, regarding their rights for translation and interpretation services and how to access them. This information is given at the beginning of the school year. Parents are also given questions in their native language that they can ask teachers during parent teacher conferences, held throughout the school year. The school provides translation and interpretation services through school staff and over the phone from the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys, conferences and letters from parents are used to gather quality feedback on the school's performance in providing translation and interpretation services for our diverse community. 9 
