 28Q325 School Name: HILLSIDE ARTS & LETTERS ACADEMY Principal: RAQUEL NOLASCO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Hillside Arts and Letters Academy 28Q325 School Number (DBN): 342800011325 9-12 167-01 Gothic Drive, Jamaica NY, 11432 718-658-1249 Phone Number: 718-658-1613 Fax: Annis Dry Adry2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Raquel Nolasco Aasine Cassara Joseph Perry Gabrielle Almodoval SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Dalys Herrea Andres Pena Jenardre Ali . District Information Geographical District: 28 Juan Mendez Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place, Queens, NY 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: JMendez2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-7696 Phone Number: Queens FSC: 718-281-7519 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Marlene Wilks Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Raquel Nolasco AasineCassara Joe Perry AnnisDry Ebony Smith Andres Pena Kimberly Smith Gail Meeks *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Gabrielle Almodoval Marilyn Rodriguez-Ortiz Renee Conwell Parent/ Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? MISSION STATEMENT The mission of Hillside Arts and Letters Academy is to offer students a challenging college preparatory curriculum with a special emphasis on visual arts, music, and writing. Students at Hillside Arts become self-directed and resourceful learners with a deep appreciation for the arts as not only a source of enjoyment and personal growth, but also as a   path to understanding and changing society. We prepare students to graduate as independent thinkers who are academically well-rounded, creative, and especially well-prepared to innovate and collaborate. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Hillside Arts and Letters Academy (HALA) is a small school of about 465 students located in the Borough of Queens, New York. Its student population is among the most diverse in the country, with over 40 nationalities represented. The vast majority of students at HALA live in communities in Queens that are close to the school, and over 60 percent of students are eligible for free or reduced priced lunch based on their income. HALA offers students a curriculum that is rigorous and college preparatory across all subject areas, and is also enriched by its arts theme. HALA currently has a partnership with the Queens Museum, St. John's University, The Leadership Program Inc. and Institute for Student Achievement. The Queens Museum hosts an after school art collective that culminates in a show at the Museum for our students. St. John's accredits several of our higher level courses to allow us to offer college credits to qualifying students. In addition, Lincoln Center and Shakespeare Company provide teaching artists that allow our students, including ELL students, to learn English through Dramatic Performance. Our demographics are split among 41% black, 25% Asian, 25% Hispanic and 2% white, and we have approximately 12% ENL students and 15% students with Special Needs. STRENGTHS As indicated in our 2016-2017 Quality Review, our school is Well Developed in nearly all domains, including Curriculum, Pedagogy, Teacher Leadership, and School Culture. Our support programs for students, including our advisory program and our extended school day and year programs have allowed us to create this successful culture at HALA. This is supported by excellent survey results in the area of school culture. The advisory and personalization program at HALA has proven an effective means for supporting students’ social and emotional growth as adolescents. It is also an effective support for the development of good work habits, and furthermore supports students in planning for college and careers after graduation. HALA’s advisory program is a crucial safety net that ensures the highest level of achievement possible for all students. The “Arts and Letters” theme at HALA increases student engagement and student achievement. Students at HALA gain multiple college-level writing experiences before they graduate, which is a critical factor in ensuring that students succeed when they enter college. Students also have increased opportunities to participate in visual arts and music programming, and even have the opportunity to graduate with a Regents Diploma with Distinction in the Arts. HALA has developed curriculum that has proven effective at supporting students with special needs and students who are English language learners. Curriculum at HALA is developed by applying the principles of Universal Design for Learning, resulting in higher student achievement. 0  HALA is proud of several unique learning experiences it offers to students in order to better prepare them for college and careers. In particular, grade 9 and 10 students participate in “Portfolio Day” presentations that require them to present their class work along with reflections on their strengths and areas of growth as students. In the 11th grade, students present arts-based class work to adult visitors and, in addition, lead a “Student-Led Conference” at which they present their grades, progress and future plans to a teacher and parent. In the 12th grade students participate in “Interview Day” where they are interviewed by adults who work in various fields, simulating the real-world experience of presenting themselves and their knowledge in a high-stakes situation. CHALLENGES This year, HALA will continue in the challenging work of increasing the rigor of the curriculum offered to students as we continue our partnership with AP For All, expanding from 5 to 8 Advanced Placement offerings. We will continuously calibrate curriculum against CCLS resources, and employ structured collaborations among faculty in order to ensure that all faculty members develop increased capacity to implement the instructional shifts. In addition, we will attempt to improve our Assessment, rated on our Quality Review as a Proficient, to become Well Developed. KEY AREAS OF FOCUS This year, HALA will continue to build on its course offerings so that students’ preparation for college continuously increases. We will also continue to work to increase HALA’s overall score in the “Instructional Core” section of the NYC School Survey. The key focus will be on expanding our writing program to classes outside of the ELA department, as well as offering an increased number of higher level courses to our students. In addition, we will work to improve the area of Assessment, which our 2016-2017 Quality Review indicated was an area that was an area for focus. We have revamped our periodic assessment system to ensure more useful data for teachers and to build assessments that are closely aligned to Common Core Standards in every academic class. We have continuously worked to develop teacher capacity to plan high level assessments and checks-for-understanding into each lesson. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school has a high number of ELL and SWD students, and our ELL new arrivals have increased in the past year. We currently have 12% ELL students and 15% SWD Students. Our ELL students range widely from beginner to advanced students. Students come from a wide variety of language backgrounds including Bengali, Arabic, Spanish, and Creole. Our school must therefore target services towards these students, including both push-in and pull-out ELL services, after school and Saturday programs for these students, and increased parent communication and involvement. Our SWD students require several services as well, from related services and SETSS to integrated co-teaching and individualized classes. 1  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past year we have made great strides in our Rigorous Instruction, helping our school to receive Well Developed in all instructional areas on our quality review and completing our first year as members of the AP For All cohort, offering 5 AP courses. We have engaged in professional development around implementing high level advanced placement skills in all levels of instructional. Our key area of improvement will be strong Family and Community ties. We hope to implement student led conferences throughout all grades to empower our students to engage with families to discuss academic progress and college preparation planning. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q325 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 467 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 2 10 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 20 7 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 74.3% % Reduced Lunch 13.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 4.7% 27.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.24 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 92% 84% 84.3% 10.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A YES No N/A 69 52 3 86.6% 6.2% 18.0% 41.3% 22.7% 7.1% 4 50% 4.6 N/A N/A 95% 88% 85.7% 13% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: HALA scored “Meeting or Exceeding Target” on nearly all areas regarding academics and instruction in our Quality Review and School Quality Guide. However, we want to increase the number of students graduating at a “College Ready” level, or having completed College Preparatory Coursework. HALA has several strengths related to this capacity framework element. Those strengths include: Students currently complete 4 college level papers in the 12th grade in preparation for college   Rigorous project based units are implemented every semester in every course.  Regents preparatory support is available after school and on Saturdays.  Department teams develop and review curriculum collaboratively and calibrate the level of rigor of student tasks using CCLS resources.  HALA offers intensive coaching to teachers who are new, or who demonstrate increased need for support.  Faculty at HALA have developed several effective shared teaching practices and curriculum components through the collaborative inquiry process in grade teams. Priority Needs: Recent DYO periodic assessment scores indicate a need to further refine writing tasks and further calibrate them with the CCLS. Furthermore, previous data from Periodic Assessments (DYOs) indicated a need for students to develop their ability to produce longer and more varied pieces of writing for a variety of tasks and purposes. New requirement of all students passing the CC ELA exam necessitates a stronger focus on college level writing. 4  HALA offers AP courses in Biology, Calculus, Computer Science, English Literature and US History. - Based on the 2016 School Quality snapshot, 26% of HALA seniors graduated having taken a college level course - Based on the 2016 School Quality snapshot, 24% of seniors graduated college ready. Preliminary numbers for 2016-2017 show increases as 55% of students scored college-ready on Math and 60% on ELA last year. - College course access for our Comparison Group, according to the School Quality Snapshot, is 46% - In 2017, HALA achieved a 4 year graduation rate of 84% Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all core academic teachers will have collaboratively developed and implemented at least one curriculum unit that incorporates an Advanced Placement skill. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A vertical team will be created. It will consist of one member of each core academic department. Vertical team leaders will analyze school data in order to assess students’ academic strengths and weaknesses and define an AP skill for each core academic department. All grade level teams. September 2018-June 2019 Administrators Vertical team leaders are provided with time to meet before, during or after school. All grade level teams. September-October 2018 Vertical Team Leaders All departments will create a comprehensive document aligned to the AP Course Description standards that identify the key skills/content to be taught at each grade level All AP teachers will be provided support by professional learning teams. All teachers will have opportunities to analyze and reflect on curriculum implementation using a lens of rigor in the curriculum. Grade Level Teams October 2018-May 2019 Administrators, Vertical Team Leaders 6  All teachers will share curriculum resources using a digital platform. 9th and 10th grade teachers will introduce skills and concepts needed for success in AP and other challenging courses. All teachers will use shared unit planning and lesson planning resources that require teachers to identify the pre-defined AP skill. Content teachers will work collaboratively with Special Education and ELL teachers in order to create scaffolded lessons. Trust will be fostered through building of a community of adult learners who share their work with each other on a continuous basis. All school community members will be engaged in the process of reflecting on learning experiences. HALA will increase course offerings in the coming year to include AP Environmental Science, AP English Language, AP Spanish and AP Psychology. All members of learning community December 2018 - May 2019 Administrators, Faculty Members, Parents, Students Administrators 7  HALA will engage with the AP For All Program to offer PD to teachers at all grade levels. HALA will provide extended day and week hours, including Saturday school and after-school tutoring, to address the needs of diverse learners in advanced classes. Grade Level Teams Grade Level Teams Grade Level Teams 8  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. HALA will hold several Family Information AP for All Nights to encourage family involvement and understanding and to recruit parents and students to take, and persist in, AP Courses. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Vertical teams will be provided per-session for meetings, AP4All will provide funds for teacher professional development, team facilitators will meet after school hours to plan team meetings, HALA will align it’s schedule with campus schools to allow for sharing of AP courses. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A 9  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Grade 9-12th team teachers will participate in this goal. Teachers will participate in a variety of PD activities, and will implement the strategies in the classroom. Supervisory staff will work in collaboration with staff to plan and implement professional development. Supervisory staff will also conduct observations and mini-observations to monitor and support implementation of strategies in the classroom. Administrators will review at least one unit plan for each teacher to track the alignment with AP skill. By February 2018 all department teams will review unit plans to certify that there is an AP skill present. Administrators will collect unit plans at this time to compare with AP Course Skills and identify relevant alignment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) By January 2019, every student will have been given an assessment of 5 AP style questions that focus on the skill that has been implemented. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? One of the hallmarks of the HALA curriculum is its advisory program. Advisory allows for distributive counseling, academic support, team building and development of school culture. 100% of HALA students are scheduled for an advisory class for each year they attend HALA. Our advisory program offers intensive, personalized support for each and every one of our students. Students engage in a curriculum that is designed to help students adjust to high school, prepare them for college, and expose them to important topics such as identity, anti-bullying, and race. Teachers are assigned small groups of students that meet together 4 times a week in a supportive environment. In the ninth grade, advisories utilize multiple art forms as a part of their curriculum. In the 10th and 11th grade, students opt into advisories based on an arts focus. In the 12th grade, students are purposefully placed into advisories in a way that best supports their needs. Students with IEP’s and ELL students as well as high risk seniors are thoughtfully distributed into advisories. Advisory curriculums in each grade support students social emotional learning. The structure of the course allows teacher flexibility to meet the needs of their particular advisory. At this time the priority need is support for teachers. Newer teachers have joined HALA’s staff and could benefit from formal PD on HALA’s advisory program. The HALA advisory curriculum has been developed by the founding teachers of each grade so as the school has developed teacher’s input has been needed to adapt the curriculum. The ninth grade curriculum was developed in 2010, the tenth grade curriculum in 2011, the eleventh grade curriculum in 2012 and the 12th grade curriculum in 2013. While the school has been incorporating more restorative practices, a clear protocol for the use in advisory has not been fully established and instituted. While well above the city average of 49%, only 62% of students at HALA feel that teachers support them while they are upset. It is through our advisory curriculum that we will be able to raise that percentage. 1  The structure of grade team meetings, on Wednesday afternoons, allows teachers to collaborate on advisory curriculum, assess academic progress of the grade and plan grade wide events. Lunch meetings are utilized for discussing specific students of concern during kid talks and to allow advisors to learn of any concerns that they need to address with their advisees. The School Quality Report indicates that students feel the school creates a supportive environment above the average of the city and the borough. In general students feel that teachers support their social emotional needs at a rate of 98%. A closer look at the numbers shows that “70 percent of students say that students rarely or never harass, bully or intimidate other students at their school.” It also shows that “63% of students say that their teachers support them when they are upset.” Both of these numbers are above the city average and comparison group averages. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, more than 80% of HALA Students will rate our school positively in the category of “Personal Attention” on the NYC School Survey. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Advisors will complete a needs assessment survey on individual needs for facilitating an effective advisory program All advisors Administration will meet with parents during Parent Association meetings to gather input on students and family needs Parents PD committee will review survey results and create a PD plan for the 2018-2019 school year Teachers Utilizing both outside resources and the guidance department, advisory professional development will be offered to all staff members. Intervisitation between staff members will be used to help improve consistent implementation of advisory curriculum Grade teams will collaborate on curriculum during meetings. Teachers Staff Summer-Early Fall 2018 Principals cabinet and Administrators Early Fall 2018 Administrators and Parent coordinator Early Fall 2018 Early Fall 2018 through June 2019 Principals cabinet and Administrators Administrators Teachers Winter to Spring 2019 Grade team Facilitators 3  Grade teams will collaborate on preventing bullying curriculum during meetings. Youth Services will circulate a referral form for students that are in need of additional support from guidance/youth services. Bi-Weekly Teachers Youth Development team Bi-Weekly Daily Grade Team facilitators Teachers Grade Team Facilitators Assistant Principals Youth Development Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In September of 2018, the parent coordinator and administrators will reach out to the Parent Association to discuss any needs they see in the current advisory program. In the Spring of 2019, the parent coordinator and administrators will meet with the Parent Association to assess any changes to the advisory curriculum. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Cost of outside Professional Development facilitators from partner organizations such as The Leadership Program 4  Per session for any after school workshops and meetings for teachers. Teachers working on the Principals Cabinet will be compensated with Per session funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, students will report above 80% positive on an internally generated student survey on questions regarding support from adults at school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Grade level teams will develop a survey of questions that mirror those on the school survey to provide formative data throughout the year. Data will be reviewed on grade level teams and in SLT and Cabinet meetings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths  Collaboration is a definitive strength of HALA.  In the 2017-2018 school year grade teams meet twice per week and Department teams meet twice per month. Teachers regularly collaborate around our shared curriculum framework to produce lesson plans that are aligned. In the past, teams have produced a minimum of one shared teaching strategy developed through Collaborative Inquiry each year.  DYO assessment data indicates that our collaborative inquiry processes have increased assessment scores in specific areas, specifically the targeted reading, writing, and use of evidence areas. Our regents scores have also been highest in areas that have been targeted by our collaborative inquiry processes (specifically, Math and writing-based tasks).  Collaboration is an integral part of ensuring that students succeed. In order to facilitate student achievement grade teams, meet twice per week and Department teams meet twice per month. Teachers regularly meet to ensure that students are progressing in their classes. Priority needs In the 2017-2018 school year, between 84 and 89% of students earned 10 or more credits in 2017-2018 the SWD Graduation rate was 100% and the ELL graduation rate was 71.4%    According to June 2018 scholarship reports, ELL scholarship was approximately 80% while General Education students achieved approximately 85% scholarship Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 85% of ELL students will earn 10 or more credits. 6 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Advisory Teachers Ongoing All teachers Grade Facilitators Grade Facilitators Ongoing Department Facilitators All teachers Ongoing Grade Facilitators Department Facilitators All teachers Ongoing Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Advisory teachers will contact all ELL parents each month to share information on his/her student or to inform the parent of a school event. Department teams will engage in professional development around eliciting background knowledge from ELLs in one content area through a variety of activities, including questioning and graphic organizers. Department teams will engage in professional development around engaging in weekly writing activity that will focus on developing a certain skill such as creative vocabulary use, the correct format of an essay or the peer editing process. Department teams will engage in professional development around learning to encourage ELL students to demonstrate their English speaking abilities in classroom work. Grade Facilitators September Department Facilitators Every other week Curriculum Coordinator, Grade Facilitators All teachers Grade Facilitators 7  Teams will engage in PD early on in the year to understand the Collaborative inquiry process and improve capacity to work as a team around using data to improve instruction. Team facilitators will meet every other week to discuss progress and assist each other in facilitating inquiry meetings. DYO assessments will be used at least 3 times a year to assess progress in improving targeted skills. On staff Data Specialist will create reports based on the DYO assessments to allow teachers to analyze and utilize assessment data in instruction and inquiry. All teachers September, January, May October, February, June Monthly Data Specialist ELL Teachers Curriculum Coordinator, AP, Principal Curriculum Coordinator Administration Special Education AP Special education and ESL department will meet with all other departments’ a minimum of once a month to review student progress in subject areas. ● CIP cycles and teacher collaborations consistently include study of disaggregated data to identify the unique needs of students with disabilities All teachers September - June ● Parents will be informed of data on student progress that emerges from CIP cycles. Parent Coordinator, Admin Team October, February, June All faculty, curriculum coordinator, admin team Admin Team, Parent Coordinator n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement n/a n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 8  Teachers will use assessment system Skedula to engage with parents and provide feedback on student work while at the same time standardizing and improving school assessment practices in classrooms. Teachers will use parent input to identify key supports needed for ELL student success. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Grade teams will have to set aside significant time for both the PD and collaborative inquiry necessary to complete this process. Teachers will need access to professional development and support from administrators to help develop their capacity in areas of student need. Data analysis will be necessary to break DYO task data down by subgroups to help spot trends and areas of need Per-session will be paid for the grading of periodic assessments. Teachers will attend professional developments. Teacher will work as data-specialist and will be paid per-session. Supervisors will be paid per-session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, 80% ELL students will achieve a minimum of 6 credits Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Disaggregated Scholarship reports for Semester 1 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. HALA leadership consistently rates highly on teacher, student, and parent surveys, receiving approval scores above 95% on all major areas including support of teachers, curriculum, communication with parents, and trust amongst faculty. HALA teacher observations and MOTP scores indicate that over 90% of teachers received Effective or Highly Effective end of year ratings. 95% of teachers received highly effective or effective MOTP ratings. Danielson area 1, Planning and Preparation, showed consistently to be an area in need of improvement for some teachers. Though several teachers received Effective or Highly Effective in this category, those who scored Highly Effective were much more likely to receive an overall Effective or Highly effective rating. In addition, on our Quality Review in 2016-2017, all areas were rated Well Developed, but Assessment received a Proficient Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all HALA teachers will have received an MOTP observation rating of Effective in Domain 1, planning and preparation, on the Danielson Rubric 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leaders will provide targeted support and feedback to teachers based on personal goals set by teachers at year-start IPC conferences. Teachers Principal and Assistant Principals IPC conferences by October 2018 Targeted instructional coaching through outside organizations such as The Leadership Program and Institute for Student Achievement will be provided to individual teachers based on MOTP need All teachers scoring "Effective or Developing" on Domain 1 Bi- monthly coaching, starting October 2018 Administrators, teachers, instructional coaches Grade level inquiry teams will engage in targeted inquiry using Improvement Science techniques to develop shared strategies around Questioning and Discussion Grade level teacher teams Principal and Assistant Principals Principal and Assistant Principals Weekly meetings October 2018-June 2019 Bi- monthly coaching, starting October 2018 Assistant principals will provide additional informal observations and feedback to teachers in need of support All teachers scoring "Developing" onDomain 1 January 2019, May 2019 Teachers of all Regents subjects Saturday school and after school targeted Regents Prep sessions will be held before exams 1  All teachers Data cycles in October 2018, January 2019, April 2019 Teachers will engage in an item analysis of Regents exams and NYC Performance tasks on department teams to identify areas for inquiry and instructional improvement 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will use assessment system Skedula to engage with parents and provide feedback on student work while at the same time standardizing and improving school assessment practices in classrooms. Families will be included in additional parent teacher conferences to improve buy in from families in increasing Saturday attendance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher teams will need per-session funding to engage in inquiry and professional development around this area of need. School will provide targeted coaching to struggling teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2  By January 2019, all teachers will score on average 3.3 or higher on MOTP observation scores in Danielson Domain 1 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher MOTP observation scores as reviewed by Administrative team Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. HALA has a number of academically oriented events centered on displaying students’ work for parents and visitors: · In the ninth and tenth grade students participate in Portfolio Day. Portfolio Day consists, primarily, of students creating portfolios of their work, and displaying and explaining this work to parents and visitors who circulate through the various displays. · In the eleventh grade students participate in Exhibition Day. On Exhibition Day students participate in a variety of forms of artistic expression centered on a topic that is relevant to both their classwork, as well as current real- world themes. For the 2017-2018 school year the 11th grade piloted the first student led parent teacher conference. · In the twelfth grade students participate in Senior Interview Day. On Senior Interview Day, students create resumes and work portfolios and participate in mock interviews for a hypothetical internship. -HALA has over 50% of families attend at least one parent-teacher conferences. · Here at HALA, staff work to ensure that families feel that they are valued, and necessary, members of our school community. · Staff reach out to all families prior to parent teacher conferences. Advisors call all families in their advisories to invite them to parent teacher conferences. · HALA staff participate in 5 parent teacher conferences throughout the school-year (3 more than the DOE mandated 2 conferences). 4  The 11th grade student led parent teacher conferences had an 80 percent parent participation. 2) The priority need that will be addressed is to increase parent involvement in parent-teacher conferences in the 12th grade. In the 2017-2018 school year 12th grade parental involvement during regular parent-teacher conferences averaged around 20%. That number rose to 40% for special senior college night events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all 12th grade students will participate in one Student Led Parent-Teacher conference. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based  instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 12th grade facilitators will meet with 11th grade facilitators to discuss prior years 11th grade SLC and discuss successes and failures of that framework. 12th grade advisors will engage in professional development centered on SLC’s. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All 11th and 12th grade advisory teachers System in place by mid-year parent Conferences in February 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals All advisory teachers All parents Twice weekly grade team meetings from September 2018-February 2019 Advisory teachers, Grade Team Facilitators 6 Guidance and Youth Development Staff Weekly during parent outreach time ●Teachers will plan the implementation of SLCs in the 12th grade team meeting. This will include professional development activities provided during grade team meetings. ● Advisory teachers will work to engage families about this event through a variety of methods of outreach Parent Coordinator and Youth Development department will host specialized workshops targeting families of students in high needs subgroups. Parent Coordinator, Admin team, Youth Once per marking period Admin team September - June 2019 7  Development Team Increase modes of communication by using new technologies, such as Twitter, Remind 101, and email contacts. Trust will be developed through open communication in workshops, which will be attended by parents, students, and faculty members. Increase parent attendance at meetings and workshops by holding targeted workshops on high-interest issues such as the college application process and financial aid. Involve SLT and Parent Association in creation of clear format and guidelines for Student-Led Conferences so that needs of parent, teachers, and students are taken into account Parent coordinator Weekly September - June 2019 Admin team, Principal’s cabinet Parent coordinator, Youth Development Team All parents, specifically senior parents SLT and Parent Association Members Administrators, PA Executive Board, Teacher Leaders Once per marking period September - June 2019 Admin team, parent coordinator, Principal’s cabinet Five times per year at each parent conference event Youth Development Team Monthly Meetings October-May 2019 One visit per semester SLT Coordinator, Principal, PA President SLT Coordinator, Principal, PA President 8  School leaders and Parent leaders will make visits to partner schools that already engage in Student-Led Conferences to observe the process and bring back materials to support our planning of these conferences Teachers, Facilitators, Special Education Teachers and ELL Teachers October - January 2019 Services will be provided for students with disabilities and ELL students. Scaffolds will be provided to help these students prepare for their SLC. These scaffolds will be created in grade team meetings with the assistance of special education and ELL teachers. Teachers, Facilitators, Special Education Teachers and ELL Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Advisory teachers will reach out to all family members via phone calls · Advisory teachers will schedule times for parents to attend conferences. · Parents will have the ability to choose from a variety of dates and times for these conferences. · Parents will have the ability to engage in these conferences in a variety of ways, including, but not limited to in-person conferences, skype-conferences, and prerecorded conferences. · The school will send out mailers to all 12th grade families. · Eleventh-grade parents will receive phone blasts to remind them when the event is getting close. · Teachers will utilize the Remind app to remind students to inform their parents/guardians about the event. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 9  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Grade teams will have to set aside significant time for both the PD and collaborative inquiry necessary to complete this process. Teachers will need access to professional development and support from administrators to help develop their capacity in areas of student need. Data analysis will be necessary to break DYO task data down by subgroups to help spot trends and areas of need Per-session will be paid for the grading of periodic assessments. Teachers will attend professional developments. Teacher will work as data-specialist and will be paid per-session. Supervisors will be paid per-session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, administrators will check in on dates and progression of the Student Led Conferences. An invitation will have been created and distributed to parents and conferences should be pre-scheduled for 75% of students Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Tracking attendance of 12th grade parents at Student Led Conferences Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students who received less than an 80% on the English Regents All students who received a score of Intermediate or lower on the NYSESLATexam. All students who received less than an 80% on the Integrated Algebra Regents Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Differentiated instruction to support the multiple learners during the school day Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) After-school tutoring one day per week. Regents Prep Program ESL Academic Intervention four times a week. Small group tutoring for ELL students four days a week. Co-teaching model with ESL teacher. After-school tutoring one day per week. Regents Prep Program ICT model with Special Education. Differentiated instruction to support the multiple learners during the school day. Co-teaching model with ESL teacher. ICT model with Special Education. Science All students who received less than an 80% on the Living Environment Regents Differentiated instruction to support the multiple learners during the school day. After-school tutoring one day per week. Regents Prep Program When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Increase classroom period to 49 minutes of instruction during the school day. After-school tutoring once a week for each grade level in each subject area. After-school Saturday Regents Prep Increase classroom period to 49 minutes of instruction during the school day. After-school tutoring once a week for each grade level. After-School Saturday Regents Prep Increase classroom period to 49 minutes of instruction during the school day. 1  ICT Model with Special Education Teacher . Social Studies All students who received less than an 80% on the History Regents Differentiated instruction to support the multiple learners during the school day. ICT Classes in Social Studies. After-school tutoring one day per week. Regents Prep Program At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) During Grade Team meetings, teachers follow a Kid Talk Protocol. At the completion of the protocol, the team refers students to the counselor. Distributed counseling model Counselors train advisers to form relationships with students during advisory classes in order to ensure all student. After-school tutoring once a week for each grade level. Saturday Regents Prep Increase classroom period to 49 minutes of instruction during the school day. After-school tutoring once a week for each grade level. After-School Saturday Regents Prep All at-risk students will meet with a counselor once per week during the day and/or after school. 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 4 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 1) AIS Programs 2) Basic/emergency supplies 3) Extended school hours for PM and Saturday programs 4) Counseling services Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1) HALA will attract Highly Qualified Teachers by providing teachers with multiple opportunities for peer collaboration and support, such as grade-level team meetings and department meetings; 2) Attend high school hiring fairs and hiring halls 3) Utilize web based recruitment for job openings when applicable. 4) Emphasize teacher collaboration and curriculum creation in a supportive environment, with instructional coaching. 5) Opportunity for elective class creation. 6) Staff participation in school based decision making process 7) Daily common planning time for departments 8) Professional Development opportunities including staff retreats, after school meetings, and summer professional development workshops 9) HALA employs a team based approach to recruitment and screening of candidates including more than a dozen teachers on the hiring team. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Principal and assistant principal will attend monthly professional development provided by the Borough Field Support Center . ● Teachers will participate in weekly hour-long grade level team workshops to fine tune curriculum 5  according to the CCSS. ● Through a partnership with the Institute for Student Achievement, intensive instructional coaching will be provided to teachers on an individual needs-based basis. ● Through grant funding, all HALA faculty will participate in 2-3 curriculum and teaching overnight retreats for intensive PD support. ● All new teachers will receive weekly mentoring provided by in-house faculty. ● All teachers will submit unit plans for review periodically to ensure alignment with the CCSS. ● Teachers will participate in the observation process for a minimum of 4-6 classroom visits per year, with feedback provided in alignment with the Danielson rubric for teaching.  All faculty will participate in any related off-site professional development workshops.  During Department meetings, teachers in each department will look at a variety of assessments, including NYC Performance Task assessments and the Common Core Learning Standards, to determine the ideal periodic assessment options to track student growth in that subject area.  Departments will engage in workshops and readings that will help support teachers in using this assessment data to drive instruction. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). - n/a 6  4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet in department meetings twice per month, where DYO Common Core Aligned assessments are developed. - Assessments are aligned to collaboratively created rubrics and given at a minimum of three times per year per class. - Teachers are given chances to examine data and improve their use of data through PD provided via Grade Team and Department meetings. - Teachers use a variety of additional assessments, indicated in our Unit Plan template and collaboratively developed lesson structure, including checks for understanding, exit tickets. - Teachers look at student work and data from these assessments in both Grade Team and Department meetings to plan modifications to instruction. - Principal and Assistant Principals meet with individual teachers to ensure the implementation of these instructional improvements. - Teams engage in Collaborative Inquiry Process to develop shared instructional practices that address needs identified by the team using student data. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal 209,065.00 0 12,366.00 0 X n/a X n/a 7 Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B n/a 5A, 5B n/a  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,083,262.00 X 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 8  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Hillside Arts and Letters Academy , in compliance with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Hillside Arts and Letters Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 0  ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ●Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ●Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ●Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ●Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 1  ●Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ●Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ●Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ●Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ●Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent- Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Hillside Arts and Letters Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● Using academic learning time efficiently; ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 3  ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; 4  ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent 5  possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other people and property; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 49 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 4 2 2 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our program will be targeting literacy skills. We want to provide resources to strengthen basic literacy skills for our entering, emerging and transitioning ENL students in all grade levels. By strengthening these literacy skills, students will be able to perform better in all of their content area classes. This will also ensure their college readiness. To target the students and their needs, we consulted their content area teachers and looked DYO scores, NYSESLAT scores and report card scores. Students who were struggling across content areas were asked to join this program. Records and attendance will be maintained by the teachers themselves. They will keep student work in folders. Both students and parents will be notified by phone and written letter in their languages through the DOE website. We plan to meet after school on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 3-4pm for duration of the school year. The language of instruction will be in English by the 2 certified ESL teachers, Renée Conwell and Niki Psomopoulos. They will team-teach and will use the necessary strategies (such as parallel teaching and station teaching) based on the academic needs and levels of the students with flexible grouping. We will use the smartboard for instruction, along with textbooks such as Fundamental Grammar by Azar. We will also use laptops and iPads with educational apps and software. These will be supplemental and distinct from those used for daily instruction. The ESL teachers will push into the classes of the content area teachers. One class will have a 25 students and the other class will have 24 students. This activity supports the students in the development of writing skills through tasks that are rigorous, and very thoroughly scaffolded. These teachers work intensively on developing students' skills with grammar, sentence structure, and organization. ELL students learn to utilize the HALA Common Core aligned writing framework. All ELL students practice writing essays that are grammatically correct and well organized. Scaffolding experience includes the use of models, graphic organizers, and peer editing workshops. Similarly to the ELA class, this course focuses on grammar, sentence structure, and organization skills so that students can articulate their ideas using evidence from non-fiction text in the content area. In order to accelerate development of academic English and to increase achievement in math, the ESL teachers will work closely with the math teachers to implement a variety of scaffolding strategies and implement strategies consistent with socio-cultural learning theory based instruction. Student will work collaboratively in accessing academic content. In the ESL/ELA 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information class ELL Students at the entering, emerging and transitioning level, will use educational software as well as other software and internet-based resources to advance their language development. Text used in the program will include an assortment of age and grade appropriate fiction and non-fiction resources that will be used to develop academic language and increase achievement in the reading and writing modalities of the NYSESLAT and on the English Regents. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The following teachers will receive professional development in order to delivery effective instruction for ELL students. 2 ESL Teachers, 4 ELA Teachers, 5 Math teachers, 2 Living Environment teachers, 1 Chemistry teacher, 1 Earth Science Teacher 5 History teachers, 4 special education teachers. All teachers will work with ESL students, as a result all teachers will receive professional development on delivering effective instruction to ELL students. This professional development will be provided by the principal, assistant principal and instructional coach. Weekly meetings will take place on Wednesday from 2:15pm to 3:45pm or during department meetings. Records will be maintained by the ESL teachers, including agendas and attendance sheets. Weekly professional development meetings which will include the following topics: Universal Design for Learning Reading Strategies Language Development Analysis of student work, scaffolding instruction Incorporating technology in the curriculum Peer critiques of teacher-generated curriculum Data Driven instruction Common Core Aligned Curriculum These PDs will positively impact the progress of ELLs because it will help all staff understand how to scaffold and differentiate instruction specifically for their ELL students. Professional development is important because we need to continue to grow as a staff for all students and the ELLs. We always utilize our own personal data to discuss what further professional development may be useful. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Workshops for Parents of ELLs Two workshop series which will be provided to parents of ELLs each semester. The workshops will be organized by the Parent Coordinator and presented by the Youth Development Team and teachers of ELLs. We will facilitate workshops and will also interpret/translate as needed for ELL parents during the workshops. We will utilize the many languages spoken on our staff and provide translators for the other languages. Parent workshops will be provided during evening hours to accommodate parent and community needs. At each meeting, attendance will be taken and agendas will be distributed in multiple languages. Our staff is multilingual and we will utilize those strengths in translating for all parents. We will provide translators via the DOE if needed. We will have 3 sessions, throughout the year for parents to become familiar with the Common Core Learning Standards and school wide procedures and explaining our instructional model and coach them in how to help students at home. Depending on the workshop, we will have certain staff members and community based organizations such as the Leadership Program come to present each topic. We noticed that the ELL parents may not feel as informed as other parents. Their attendance at parent association meetings and parent teacher conferences indicate that. Therefore, we would like to encourage them to come to special workshops for them to make them feel more included and in the know. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 0  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name Hillside Arts and Letters Academy Borough Queens School Number 325 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Raquel Nolasco Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Renee Conwell,Niki Psomopoulos Teacher/Subject Area Brito/Math Teacher/Subject Area Fredrica McDuffus/ELA Related-Service Provider Thomas Mehldau Superintendent Juan Mendez Assistant Principal Gabrielle Almodoval Coach type here School Counselor Marilyn Rodriguez-Oritz Parent type here Parent Coordinator Annis Dry Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 2 Total number of ELLs 55 ELLs as share of total student population (%) %  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Most of our ELLs come to our school with at least some background in English, either at their junior high school or even in their home countries. Prior to our ELLs being placed in a class, we first examine their NYSESLAT/NYSITELL data from the previous spring. If the student scored in the entering range, he/she is automatically placed into a double-period ESL class. If a student scores in the emerging/transitioning range, further testing in speaking, reading, writing, and listening is administered to determine whether or not the student will be successful in an ELA class (with an additional one-period support class). If the student is then considered a low- emerging/transitioning student, the student is placed into a double-period class of ESL. If a student has recently entered the country and has never taken the NYSITELL, the NYSITELL exam is administered to determine (1) if the student requires ESL, and (2) whether the student belongs in a double-period class or a single period class with an ELA class. This data will inform our instructional plan because it will identify the areas in which students struggle and in which they 3  excel. For example, if a student scores high in reading and writing, but low on speaking/listening, the instructional plan for that student will be adjusted accordingly. Similarly, if a student scores high in speaking/listening, but not so high in reading and writing, the instructional plan for that student will be geared more towards reading and writing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We created push in and pull out classes so student have extra support in the ELA classes. We also provide students with enrichment after school so they are able to excel in the ENL programs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At weekly grade team meetings, we evaluate data regarding ELLs, and we go through a CIP process whereby we look at the data, evaluate it based on previous results and comparison to non-ELLs, and depending on how successful we determine our ELLs to be, we come up with a plan for the future to ensure maximum success. As part of SLT and Principal's cabinet meetings, we look at school-wide goals for the bottom 3rd of each grade level, and since many of the students in the bottom 3rd are ELLs, data is carefully examined there to see where modifications need to be made, if any, to instruction in each subject area. In our English Department, we create departmental goals. The ELLs are expected to meet those goals as well in their ENL/ELA class. At the end of the year, we use portfolios, DYOs, and NYSITELL scores from the years prior, and the ESL teachers analyze the data to see if the AYP is met. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers meet twice a week to discuss the summative data and adjust curricula according to the results of the data. Our ENL teachers provide professional developments to all teacher in order to for teacher to adjust curriculum. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSITELL/NYSESLAT revealed that typically, our students struggle in reading and writing across proficiency levels, and score higher in speaking and listening 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers and guidance counselor meet in grade teams and analyze assessment data. Once the data is analyzed, programs are created to provide ENL with the appropriate programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction is delivered through push-in model and self-contained model. Students are placed in a double block period based on their proficiency. For our free standing ESL double period class, students are placed homogenously; 4  entering, emerging and transitioning. We also have a free standing single period ESL class for our expanding students. For our push-in model, students are placed heterogenously for the particular content. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The entering, emerging and transitioning free standing ESL class provides 500 minutes a week. The expanding stand along ESL class provides 250 minutes a week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All students receive instruction in each content area in English with push-in or self-contained classes in English. All lessons are CCLS aligned and are differentiated by content, process and product, and have components of UDL in order to ensure different entry points and scaffolding for ELL students. Within each content area class, which is taught in English, students are provided with bilingual glossaries in order to provide for native language support. In 9 th , 10 th , 11 th , and 12 th grade, there are co teachers in each subject area. In 11 th and 12 th grade English class, an ESL co-teaches with the content area teacher to support the needs of the ELLs in that classroom. In grade teams, ESL teachers provide strategies and supports for all the staff. Students are provided with laptops to assist in translation and research. Teachers use several materials for their teaching. They use websites, including Flocabulary.com and englishforeveryone.com. They also use literature texts and novels. The teachers are encouraged to use graphic organizers to help students in their writing process. Specifically, for arugmentative essays which align with CCLS Writing Standard 1, they have several visual aids to help foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? State exams are ordered in specific languages and teachers and outside agents translate for students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We differentiate our instruction for the ELLs through proficiency levels. We take the number of years the students have been serviced into account, but we also place students based off their level. a. SIFE students are surrounded by a print rich environment and are provided with texts and hand outs in large print, picture dictionary as well as handwriting and alphabet handbooks. All content is scaffolded, rephrased, and repeated for SIFE students. We also offer an afterschool enrichment program for those students who need the support. b. Student who are newcomers receive a double period of ESL instruction. In addition to receiving a double period, they also receive at least one more period of push-in service. c. ELLs receiving 4 to 6 years of service receive support through push-in services. These students are supported through additional support by the ESL Teacher Ms. Conwell afterschool and depending on their level, a support class during the day. d. ELLs who are long term also reveive support through push-in services and a support class depending on their level. They also receive additional support from the ESL teacher after school. e. Former ELLs are given content based instruction, regents/common core prep tutoring, extra time on state exams. Content 5  teachers meet with ESL teachers to formulate strategies so that former ELLs can succeed in their content classes. As per CR Part 154.2, all former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status are also given a co taught class of 250 mintues per week. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Each grade team uses a Collaborative Inquiry Process. In this process teachers use data to identify a skill that ELL-SWDs are struggling with. Stratagies that have developed from grade teams include scaffolding protocols for reading, writing and speaking. In addition, teachers differentiate by content, process and product and utilize the principles of UDL to scaffold and create different entry points for students. In grade team, teachers discuss the Targets of Measurments for grade and age appropriate material across the board. This assists in English Language acquisition because the students are emersed in an environment that fosters listening, speaking, reading and writing skills in English through scaffolded PBL (Project Based Learning ) Units. In each classroom, there are laptops for all students and a smartboad. All students are offered bilingual glossaries as well as google translate. All ELL-SWDs are provided with the same support. The programing director sits with the ESL and Special Department to ensure that all said students are receiving the appropriate services. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school uses ICT and extra support before and afterschool to enable flexibilty to achieve the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs and to achieve their IEP goals and so that students attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. We also program ELL-SWD for addional support classes. The programming director sits with the ESL and Special Education teacher and discussed the NYSITELL/NYSESLAT scores and regents scores to appropriately place them in ICT classes. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs in math is to have Integrated Co Teaching in Algebra with a Math/Special Education teacher, Ms. Karissa Schaedler. We are also offering several algebra review courses for students who may need the extra support in order to pass. Living Environment and Earth Science are also ICT classes which the students benefit from. Many ELL students are in PM school and Regents Prep classes. These intervention programs allow the ELLs to receive credits they need, along with the extra support they need. For certain advanced ELL students, we have created additional support classes. Those students who are in a general ELA class, have an extra class with Ms. Psomopoulus, specifically supporting their ELA class. Throughout the school, you will see these intervention services: UDL Differentiation of Instruction After School Targeted help for ELL students Scaffolding Additional English Support Classes 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are collaborating with Lincoln Center this year and their LEAD (Learning English and Drama) Program. This is an opportunity for one class to have 20 sessions with a teaching artist from Lincoln Center to come in and support reading a novel through theater. We also are beginning a new enrichment program for ELLs. We want peer tutors and basic English skills to be the main focus. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently we are continuing our services the same as last year. 6  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students have equal access to all after school activities and clubs, such as student council, NHS, COSA, Be Spoke (Literary Magazine), Drama Club, Guitar Club, Yearbook Committee and Debate Club. In addition, all students are part of our Advisory program which also incorporates the arts. ELLs also take one year of Art or Music as part of their curriculum. ELL students are provided with after school supplement services by the ESL teacher and fellow advanced ELLs in a peer tutoring program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials that are used to support ELLs include, but are not limited to laptops (available as 1:1 if teacher needs), computers (one in every classroom) , bilingual glossaries, recorders, audio books, science lab, and smart boards. Many of these materials are available for the students to use for support daily. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We allow ELL students to use glossaries, recorders, computers and translators. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Entering/Emerging students are typically in 9th and 10th grade and 14-15 years old. Transitioning students are typically 10th - 11th grade and Expanding are typically 11th-12th grade. Therefore we are able to place the ESL teachers accordingly as support teachers in specific classes, such as 11th grade ELA. Grade team teachers discuss curriculum across the board and they plan according to cognitive needs of the ELL-SWD's and the age/grade levels of the ELLs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials that are used to support ELLs include, but are not limited to laptops (available as 1:1 if teacher needs), computers (one in every classroom) , bilingual glossaries, recorders, audio books, science lab, and smart boards. Many of these materials are available for the students to use for support daily. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). If the student is identified as an English Language Learner the parent is asked to attend an orientation session where they are informed of our program for ELLs and given choices of available programs at other sites. Parents will be shown a video and given literature so thay can understand the differences of a Transitional Bilingual, Dual Language, and a Freestanding ESL Program. At these sessions we provide written and visual material for parents to explore and take home in their native language. Families of students identified as ELL are invited to an orientation session where Ms. Conwell, ESL Teachers, and others, if interpreters are necessary; Ms. Nolasco, AP, Marilyn Rodriguez-Ortiz, Guidance Counselor for our Spanish speaking families, and Ms. Elbadaly for our Arabic speaking families. During this session families will be informed of the 3 programs available in NYC schools. These are Dual Language, Transitional Bilingual and Freestanding ESL. Letters will be sent to parents if we intend to offer a new program if they choose BTE/DL program. Parent Survey and Program selection forms overwhelmingly indicate parents prefer to have their child enrolled in an ESL Program; therefore, HALA provides a Free-Standing ESL program. Data from the small number of students we have show a 100% choice for a Freestanding ESL Program. When a student is admitted to the NYC schools system parents are actively involved in the decision-making 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. 7  c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is ongoing at HALA. We recognize that building teacher capacity to serve ELL students will translate into better students' achievement. Our professional development program will focus on providing specific strategies that will increase outcomes of ELL students for all staff, including assistant principals, guidance counselors, special education teachers and paraprofessionals. PD is on November 3, an overnight retreat November 13-14, February 1, June 9. We also meet every week for grade team and bi monthly for department teams. Some of the topics include but are not limited to the following: Scaffolding Across The Curriculum: Strategies and Implementation (multi-session study groups) UDL Differentiated Instruction Preparing ELLs to meet and gain a clear understanding of CCLS Push-in and ICT strategies Implementation (Multi-session study group) Teaching Science, math and history to ELL students Interactive learning and the ELL student Writing straegies for ELLs to meet CCLS Weekly Grade Team meetings Kid Talk Our Collaborative Inquiry Process allows teachers in all grade teams to choose a CCLS and find where students need extra support. We then learn about the standard and create a strategy to support those needs in all classroom areas. The minimum 7.5 hours of ELL training is completed throughout the year at the above mentioned Professional Development workshops. During our retreats and PD days, we allow many workshops on the needs of the ELL student and strategies for teaching them in CCLS aligned instruction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. To help staff assist ELL students transition from middle school to high school the the folllowing will be implemented: All teachers will participate on grade-level inquiry teams. Individual teachers will plan units and lesson with help of coach As part of distributive counseling along with the guidance counselor, all teachers will teach advisory which will focus on helping students transition into high school Professional development is ongoing at HALA. We recognize that building teacher capacity to serve ELL students will translate into 8  better students' achievement. Our professional development program will focus on providing specific strategies that will increase outcomes of ELL students for all staff, including assistant principals, guidance counselors, special education teachers and paraprofessionals. Some of the topics include but are not limited to the following: Scaffolding Across The Curriculum: Strategies and Implementation (multi-session study groups) UDL Differentiated Instruction Preparing ELLs to meet and gain a clear understanding of CCLS Push-in and ICT strategies Implementation (Multi-session study group) Teaching Science, math and history to ELL students Interactive learning and the ELL student Writing straegies for ELLs to meet CCLS Weekly Grade Team meetings Kid Talk Our Collaborative Inquiry Process allows teachers in all grade teams to choose a CCLS and find where students need extra support. We then learn about the standard and create a strategy to support those needs in all classroom areas. We keep these records on file in a binder for all departments and all grade teams. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to DOE scheduled parent-teacher conferences, Hillside Arts and Letters Academy provides the parents with 3 additional conferences. Our advisory teachers also keep in contact with their student's parents about their progress on a regular basis. As always, translation is available for those who need. The ESL teachers discuss with all teachers the progress of the students and relay the information to the parents during these conferences or phone calls. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We offer several parent workshops are that are translated in Bengali, Arabic, Spanish and Creole, such as FAFSA, and college fairs. We also have 5 Parent/Teacher conferences throughout the year which many parents attend. We also have a multi-cultural event that celebrates the diverse cultures at HALA. Our parent coordinator, Ms. Dry translates for Haitian Creole students. She also sends out messages and letters in several languages. She is in constant contact with the parents of our students and always gets translators to assist in her communication with them. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 9  0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Raquel Nolasco, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: HALA School DBN: 28Q325 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Raquel Nolasco Title Principal Gabrielle Almodoval Assistant Principal Annis Dry Parent Coordinator Renee Conwell, Niki Psomop/ENL ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Fredrica McDuffus/English Teacher/Subject Area Shirley Brito/Math Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Marilyn Rodriguez- Ortiz School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 1/1/01 10/29/15 10/29/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/29/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 28Q325 School Name: Hillside Arts and Letters Academy Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents' language preference for oral and written communication is ascertained at the initial parents intake interview at the time of registration. Parents complete a written and oral communication language preference survey. Bilingual staff members are available to provide written translation and oral interpretation for our parents and guardians. Some parents have requested communication in English while others have requested their native language be used to complete the Home Language Identification Survey. Feedback from parents at school events, meeting and workshops provide our school with additional data in the written translation and oral interpretation needs of parents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 3 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Bengali, Spanish, Haitian Creole, French, Urdu, Arabic, Tagalog, Hindi, Punjabi, English 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent/Teacher conferences, parent surveys, handbooks, calendars, newsletters, afterschool tutoring, NYS testing dates, saftey drills, lunch forms, blue cards 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent/teacher conferences, meet the teachers night, college night, multicultural day, portfolio day, interview day, phone calls from teachers and advisors, field trips 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 4  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school determines the primary language spoken by the parent of each student enrolled in the school at the time of registration and intake. The school will maintain a current record of the primary language of each parent in ATS and on the student emergency card. The school will provide translation and interpretation services to all parents who require language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the DOE. Parents may choose to rely on a bilingual adult friend/companion or relative for language and interpretation services. Students or minors under the age of 18 do not serve as interpretors for school staff and parents during any formal or informal meeting where student achievement and/or student conduct are discussed (for example, parent teacher conferences, disciplinary mettings with a principal, parent inquiries about attendence, and parent conferences with guidance counselors.) We provide regular and timely provision of translated documents through onsite bilingual staff and the Translation and Interpretation Unit. The school provides timely interpretation services at group and one-on-one meetings upon request when parents communicate with teachers, guidance counselors, school nurse and/or other school staff regarding their child's education. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We use parent surveys, parent/teacher conferences and advisory phone calls home to gather feedback from the parents. 5 
