 30Q329 School Name: EAST ELMHURST COMMUNITY SCHOOL Principal: RACHEL STAROBA-HALLENB   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information East Elmhurst Community School 30Q329 343000010329 K-5 School Number (DBN): 26-25 97th Street East Elmhurst, NY 11385 718-505-6050 Phone Number: 718-505-6050 Fax: Rachel Staroba rstarobahallenbeck@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Rachel Staroba-Hallenbeck Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Jessica Baity Shannon Lee-Morgan Caitlin Antompietri SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: PaulinaOsorio n/a n/a Geographical District: 30 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Dr. Philip Composto Superintendent: 28-11 Queens Plaza North Queens, NY 11101 pcompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 7183918323 Phone Number: 718-391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North Long Island City, NY 11101 lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Rachel Staroba Stephanie Wong Shannon Lee-Morgan PaulinaOsorio Jennifer D'Antonio Caitlin Antompietri Paulina Osorio Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Parent   Name Marcela Estrella AchiaSamuel Angelica Bravo Taylor Luckie Catina Pipola Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? MISSION STATEMENT: Students, staff and families of East Elmhurst Community School, as defined by our core values, are curious and courageous critical thinkers who are active, interdependent, and culturally aware community members.   CORE VALUES: CURIOSITY – How do you challenge your knowledge and beliefs? Educators create spaces for students and themselves to engage in the productive dialogue and understanding of opposing view so we can peacefully resolve conflict and create solutions by building on each others’ ideas. Through struggle and engaging with opposing view points, we become the fullest expression of ourselves. COURAGE – How do you exercise your power and how do you respond to your mistakes? We endeavor to have the courage to speak our minds, stand up for our beliefs, and do what is right, even when no one else will. Doing this does not mean that we are unafraid – it means doing so in spite of being afraid. Courage also means seeing failure as an opportunity to grow and learn – as a natural step on the continuum of success. We stand in our agency and, through our studies, build the skills and knowledge so that we may advocate thoughtfully and strategically. COMMUNITY – How do you support your community? We build school community by developing into the fullest expression of ourselves AND supporting and advocating for others to be able to do the same. We develop into our fullest expression by being creative, engaging in the journey of understanding and the pursuit of knowledge, and through our contributions to society. As we are all interdependent and interconnected in our community, we push, create space, and advocate for all members to also fully self-express. We do this because when even one member of community is denied an opportunity to succeed, this limits community’s overall capacity and, therefore, all members of our community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. East Elmhurst Community School is located in Northern Queens, a few blocks from La Guardia Airport. We are a diverse community, with 86% of our students’ families identifying as “Hispanic.” Many of these families have arrived very recently from Mexico and Ecuador. Seven percent of our students’ families identify as “Black.” Our school also has growing Arabic and Chinese speaking communities. A growing school entering our 6th year, we have 19 classes in grades K-5. In kindergarten through second grade, there are three classes per grade: one monolingual class with a mix of both ESL and non-ESL students, one dual language class with both native Spanish speakers and native English speakers, and one monolingual ICT class, with a mix of ELL’s and students with IEP’s. In grades 3-4, we have three sections of students grouped in the same manner as those in K-2. However, in order to provide students with content experts in each subject area, the children move as groups between departmentalized teachers. Each group has a different teacher for mathematics, literacy, and social studies. In grade 5, we have two sections of students, one ICT and one dual language. They also are departmentalized so students may receive instruction from content experts. We also have a 12:1:1 self-contained special education class which includes our students in third through fifth grade, a mixtures of ELL’s and non-ELL’s with IEP’s, whom we have found benefit from a smaller and more nurturing setting, with more targeted instruction, for literacy and mathematics. All students from the 12:1:1 class are mainstreamed for music, art, Town Hall, physical education and science. STRATEGIC COLLABORATIONS AND PARTNERSHIPS In order to accomplish our mission and educational goals, PS 329Q collaborates with various institutions and professional development partners. These relationships will build capacity amongst all members of the school 0  community in order to improve the educational process and student achievement. Their work will support our day to day instruction in each classroom ensuring staff can maximize the instructional program. PS 329Q believes strongly in an arts infused balanced literacy instructional program as a pathway to supporting language development, literacy, and citizenship as well as supporting our core value of curiosity. To support this work, we partner with the NY Historical Society, Calpulli Mexican Dance Company, Art of the Dance, Marquis Studios, and various independent instrumental and dance teaching artists. Teachers were also trained to incorporate Visual Thinking Strategies (VTS), daily lyric studies, and classical music study as components of our balanced literacy program with curricular connection to our social studies, visual arts, and music instructional programs. PS 329Q believes strongly in the power of teacher collaboration through professional learning communities. We believe the strongest indicator of our success is the degree to which our educators collaborate and support one another. Teacher teams maximize professional learning time to work with professional development partners. To accomplish this, teachers have programmed times for grade level PLC, inter-grade partnerships, Model Teacher periods, and cycles for coaching. Teachers also participate in regular instructional rounds to glean an understanding of vertical alignment of our curriculum and to enhance preparation for subsequent grades. Teachers work with a literacy/leadership consultant from Teachers College to develop units of study around balanced literacy. Our consultant also builds capacity and accountability in delivering a comprehensive literacy and social studies program across all grades and classroom. The consultant will also provide demonstration lessons and develop a system where teachers can co-plan and review student work to assess student ability and foster next steps for classroom instruction. Metamorphosis is a math based professional development organization that supports our teacher teams through lab sites and curricular development to create common core aligned units of study. Dual language teachers partner with the American Reading Company to implement the ENIL system of Spanish literacy during guided reading periods. Lastly, we partner with Dr. Paul Longo to support social studies teachers to unpack the Passport program and to create greater cohesion between literacy, the arts, and social studies instruction. Our goal is the establishment of a cohesive humanities program that provides children with a strong background in liberal arts education. As a means to extend our work to our families and community, we have implemented a strong family component which will support a unified objective with respect to our school mission. Our Parent Coordinator, our bilingual Guidance Counselor and our professional development partners, we provide numerous spaces for families to become informed about our instructional program, support the work of our teachers, support their children’s learning, and support one another. Our goal is to lessen the cultural gap between home and school and to support families in becoming advocates for their children. SPECIAL INITIATIVES Our school community is made up of many divergent needs and requires critical analysis in order to equitably engage all families. As our students have varied levels of preparedness for school, our parents also present parallel challenges. As such, we need to provide differentiated supports to families so that all can advocate for their children to maximize their academic potential. In our efforts to involve families, we have realized that there are still many more families that require additional supports and information in order to effectively impact their child’s academic performance. Included in these initiatives are: monthly family workshops, Family Art, Talk with Teacher Tuesdays, Coffee with the Principal, Coffee with the PC, and regular family conferences with those families that needs extra support. As a new school, we have had the unique opportunity to roll out a new grade each year and, as such, we are able to hire only teachers who are closely aligned with our school mission and educational program. As well, our many of our families have expressed strong interest not only the academic growth of their children, but also in their own understanding of a complex school system and in deepening their knowledge of new curricular standards. Because of 1  our relatively small size, we are able to target the specific needs of individual students as well as the needs of their families by strategically developing programs that support the whole family. During our first year of operations, and continuing into the 2018-2019 academic school year, as a new school we had many accomplishments to celebrate. We have developed a comprehensive PD plan, a functioning PTA and Executive Board, a School Leadership Team that allows for meaningful dialogue among parents and educators, tightly knit grade level teacher teams that collaboratively plan, strong family communication via monthly newsletter, school website, school app, FaceBook page and active parent volunteerism. We have also developed an extension to our school day through a Saturday program that includes dance and music classes. The art teacher and dual language teachers have developed after school programs to provide enrichment and extra support for students. Our students also have ownership of the school newsletter through our Young Journalists after school club. Students work with teacher advisors to design, research and write about the issues and events that are important in our community. Students have named this monthly periodical "The Writing Express." This work not only builds community, but also supports our budding and struggling writers and demonstrates the "power of the pen." After school also hosts seven soccer teams, each coached by one of our teachers. Students will be competing in the "East Elmhurst World Cup" in April of 2019. Here, we believe in hard work, collaboration, and learning to both win and lose with dignity. We also partner with Chess in the Schools, a program that supports student academic success through weekly chess instruction and monthly tournaments. At completion of the program, our students, as 8th graders, will be eligible to apply for the College Bound program. This program supports students' journeys to college through scholarships, college tours, mentors, tutoring, SAT test prep, and part time jobs. PS 329Q has also developed some unique programs for incoming students. In order to meet the challenges for the ESSA standards, we have developed a LISTO! program where 2 – 4 year old younger siblings of our currently enrolled students come twice weekly with their parent to engage in center based play activities, literacy games, math activities, and read alouds. The LISTO! program supports children to meet the challenges they will encounter once enrolled in kindergarten. Parents have reported significant gains in their children’s letter and number recognition skills as well as their ability to play creatively, which is a pre-cursor to literacy and writing skills. In response to the demands for increased preparedness and achievement level for kindergarten students, we have also developed a screening process for incoming kindergartners. This process assesses their academic proficiency and readiness for kindergarten class. As a result of the process, we have also developed a summer school class, Kindergarten Readiness. Taught and planned by current kindergarten teachers, students will develop their school readiness skills, name writing, letter/number recognition, and social skills to better prepare them to complete kindergarten reading at level D, as per TC Running Records assessment. Students will be in attendance for 20 days over the summer during July and August of 2019. In order to also maintain a high interest level for students who are exceeding their grade level expectations and to retain these students, for the second summer, we are offering a thematic based enrichment program during the summer to support writing and computer science skills. Additionally, we are offering a summer support program to 135 students who are struggling readers or just on the cusp of performing at/above grade level. With this targeted support over the five weeks of the program, students will arrive in September one to two levels beyond their current reading level and better prepared to meet the demands of the subsequent grade. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2  SPECIAL STUDENT POPULATIONS As a community school, we have a diverse population of students who are designated as special education, many of whom received early intervention services prior to entering kindergarten. Currently we have an ICT class in all our grades. The ICT classes are heterogeneously grouped in order to provide strong models of student excellence to those students most at risk. The special education students are also provided with stimulating work that allows them to excel within their strongest modality. Teachers were all trained in visual thinking strategies, which allows all students to make comments about works of art. This approach provides the opportunity to students with a variety of literacy levels to engage deeply with high level content with the barrier of negotiating print. We also utilize lyrics and music of the American Song Book as a vehicle for literacy development. The nature of melody and repetition of the refrain helps to facilitate comprehension, access to tiers 2 and 3 vocabulary, and fluency in a more supportive manner than the unaccompanied and traditionally applied shared reading. Based on our demographics, we have a large population of ELL students, where English is not the primary language spoken at home. Supportive and stimulating instruction, we have developed dual language classes. Dual language supports academic mastery of content and literacy in both languages equally. Additionally, for our native Spanish speakers, this instructional approach provides L1 support, so that supports are building content knowledge in the L1, more strongly supporting their ability to acquire English and to transfer knowledge from the L1 to the L2. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. FRAMEWORK SUCCESSES AND AREAS OF NEED As a school community, we made the most gains in the area of Rigorous Instruction, as evidenced by most students making significant gains in literacy and the development of ESSA aligned units of study. Our most proficient students perform at up to one grade level above ESSA expectations. We are also on the road to developing a strong interdisciplinary curriculum (arts, literacy, and social studies) where children are able to think conceptually about the world using the Five Forever Factors (geography, technology, culture, politics, and economics). The work that continues to challenge us will be effectively providing a rich and rigorous curriculum within time constraints. Teachers have a comprehensive literacy program with many components that improve overall student proficiency and success in the classroom. To support this challenge, we have begun and will continue cross-training with our content area teachers to allow for increased literacy skill development in the content areas of science, social studies and the arts. We also need to develop better data analysis and progress monitoring within our math program, which is steeped in a constructivist approach to learning. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q329 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 380 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 12 11 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 85.0% % Reduced Lunch 47.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 86.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.25 0% 56% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 56.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 22 23 93.5% 8.4% 18.2% 6.8% 3.4% 0.8% 2 0% 4.9 51.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our greatest strength is our monitoring of student reading levels. During the 2017-2018 school year, our literacy coach and model teachers worked with their colleagues on revamping our norms for conducting running records and also spot checking to ensure fidelity and consistency in interpretation of results. We also worked with Data Specialist, Janet Steinberg from Teachers College, to support teachers in analyzing data to plan small groups. Our greatest priority for the coming year is to deepen our work to use running record data to target our struggling readers. We have planned to continue our work with Ms. Steinberg, beginning during our pre-service training in August of 2018. Our students have struggled most greatly in the area of inference. It is our plan to further utilize our data to refine instruction to support this skill. Additionally, we are working with the Metamophosis Math group to support teacher pedagogical practices in supporting students to dialogue around math and to create learning activities that support flexible thinking in problem solving. We have worked with Metamorphosis since 2014. To date, all teachers have received training and have grown significantly in their practice. We have also created two Model Teacher position in mathematics to support the continuity of math instruction and to ensure coherence of the Habits of Mind. We would benefit from additional work in the area of progress monitoring in mathematics. With additional periods for our Model Math teachers, they now have space in their program to analyze data and provide targeted remediation to students who are struggling with foundational concepts. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5  By June 2019, there will be an overall 5% increase in the number of students scoring at levels and 3 and 4 on the NYS ELA and Math exams. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). INSTRUCTION: Deliver TC units of study in reading and writing through arts infused 15 periods/week literacy block. Use data from running records and conferences to plan small targeted group instruction and centers in the classroom. Use Leveled Literacy Intervention kits in ICT to target students in Tier 1 setting. Use classroom data to target students not responding to Tier I interventions and provide additional targeted small group instruction/support with the RtI Team (headed by IEP/ESL Coordinator). Additionally, ESL Coordinator will provide push in support for ENL's and pull out support for Emerging ENL's and SIFE students. ICT teachers use parallel teaching to support small groups and increase engagement with SWD's. PD: Ongoing support with coaching from Teachers College and Model Teachers for Literacy, along with Data Analysis by Data Team and Data Specialist from TC. Training from Literacy Coach on calibration/interpretation. Intervisitation with experienced ICT teams to support parallel teaching structures with new teams. SYSTEMS/STRUCTURES: Professional periods, common prep periods, Model Teacher periods, instructional rounds, Literacy Coach cycles, Google Drive to store/share data and agendas/minutes, co-teaching models in class with high ENL population. STRATEGY: Adherence to TC Units of Study in reading and writing; Expansion of RtI Team (headed by IEP/ESL Coordinator); training of school aides, parents and paraprofessionals to provide needed interventions; use of professional periods for data analysis with Literacy Coach; expansion of Child Study Team to review teacher analyses and provide appropriate next steps using data from Assessment Pro. FAMILY ENGAGEMENT: Parent Coordinator will work with teacher teams to maintain website. Parent Leaders families will receive training and have schedule to provide low level interventions (i.e., sight words, letter-sounds). Family workshops and trainings on literacy development. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students K-5 July 2018– June 2019 Teachers Admin Classroom teachers, RtI Team, Administration Literacy Coach, Model Teachers Administration and Teachers Students of all levels July 2018- June 2019 Model Teacher Administration IEL/ESL Coordinator Families July 1 2018- June 2019 Principal Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselor 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families are engaged through regular communication between school and home, for example: 1. Family Conferences (each quarter) 2. Weekly Workshops with Guidance Counselor 3. Talk with Teachers Tuesdays (Momentito con Los Maestros Martes) 4. Monthly Coffee with the Principal 5. School Website/App - Parent Coordinator 6. Social Media (Facebook) - Parent Coordinator 7. School Newsletter (Student run with Faculty Advisors) 8. Principal presentations at PTA (monthly) 9. Quarterly workshops for families in the evening 10. Family Instructional Mornings - parents are welcomed into the classroom one day each month to observe instruction 11. Parent Leader Volunteers - after training, volunteers work in the classrooms during instructional times to support the teachers with administrative tasks. This creates greater transparency and allows parents to see instruction in real time. In our community, we have found that our families receive information best through ongoing dialogue over time, in place of a one-time workshop. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES: Google Drive with Lesson Plans developed with our TC consultant, grades K-5. TC Units of Study (updated) from Heinneman. Leveled libraries. Leveled Literacy Intervention kits. Wilson Fundations. 8  SCHEDULE ADJUSTMENTS/PER SESSION /PER DIEM: Common professionals on Fridays, Model Teachers have 3 additional professionals, Substitutes to cover teachers on TC days (per diem funds), after school work to organize literacy materials, new position of Assistant Principal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 75% of students will read at or above grade level, 100% of literacy teachers will have worked with Literacy Coach or Model Teacher to ensure accuracy of running records, 100% of teachers will accurately utilize data to analyze and provide meaningful interventions to struggling readers. By February 2019, Model Math Teachers will have established targeted math intervention groups to support struggling mathematicians based on ESSA aligned unit assessments and formative assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell Running Records Unit math assessments Formative assessments aligned to units of study from Terc Investigations and Metamorphosis Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As a growing school, we are constantly seeking ways to create rituals and traditions that create a larger schoolwide unity and consistency. Adding a grade each year presents the challenge of acculturating new staff and students each year. As such, as a staff we have brainstormed several activities, initiatives, and events to build a cohesive culture and continue to construct our collective narrative around "who we are" as a school community. Part of our ongoing goal is for students and families to know all teachers and staff - not only those who work directly with their child. We feel this creates, especially in a small growing school, an ambiance of familiarity, support, and a sense of belonging for each child. Additionally, this system of positive supports and extracurricular activities prevents behavioral concerns. We prefer to build up the positivity of the child, and support him/her to be the best self s/he can be, than try to address outbursts through consequences. One priority this year is to establish a schoolwide system of supporting positive behaviors in a communal and individual manner. Classroom Dojo will be used by each classroom to celebrate adherence to our community norms. Additionally, a schoolwide Dojo will be established for each classroom to celebrate their accomplishments through the accrual of #PRIDE points. Those points will be cashed in for "experiences," ranging from a chess party to a kickball game with the principal. #PRIDE points can also be donated to other classrooms to recognize their classmates' successes. Recess has been a significant area of growth in our community. Through our partnership with PlayWorks, school aides have been trained to create a space for safe and engaging play after/before lunch. Play is such an important aspect of healthy childhood development. Unfortunately, our community has limited access to open spaces for our children to play freely after school. As such, we have invested significant resources in the creation of those spaces within our school community. In the 2018-19 school year, we are working to maintain our learning through weekly recess meetings and increasing choices during recess for children. As well, we are adding a Restorative Justice Committee led by our Guidance Counselor and Assistant Principal to allow spaces for children to repair the offenses they have committed against our community and to allow our community to heal from the offense. Lastly, our Recess Coordinator, Ms. Jennifer (school aide) will train a group of Junior Coaches to lead games during recess for their 0  younger peers. Twenty Junior Coaches per grade with work with small groups of students to support taking turns, conflict resolution, and healthy choices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will work as a community to support positive behaviors as evidenced by 100% of classrooms cashing in #PRIDE points for a celebratory classroom experience. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Summer workshop with PlayWorks for school aides, Assistant Principal, and Guidance Counselor; weekly Recess Meetings and use of online PlayWorks modules to troubleshoot recess challenges; training with Gillian Smith and Borough Support on restorative practices; TCIS training for school aides and Assistant Principal; Updates at Monday PLC's on progress and troubleshooting on Dojo Recess team (school aides), Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor July 20178- June 2019 Assistant Principal STRATEGIES FOR SWD’S and ELL’s: TCIS training for school aides will help to support our students who struggle to manage frustration; bilingual school aides; bilingual guidance counselor; Occupational Therapist pushes into recess to provide sensory opportunities and training for school aides on how to support children to cool down during transitions. TEACHER-PARENT COLLABORATION: Parent Leaders volunteers will volunteer to lead games during recess; Family Fun Nights teach games and play to families; Sharing of #PRIDE Points experiences during parent events, on FB and on website; bulletin board with #PRIDE Points celebrations. School Aides, OT, Guidance Counselor July 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator July 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Two monthly events open to families to celebrate the arts, exercise, and community Monthly Coffee with the Principal Social Media - Kinvolved Family Fun Nights to teach games and play Parent Leaders at recess Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Fair Student Funding for per session Title I for parent engagement and materials Title I for PlayWorks training Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, lunchroom culture will improve as evidenced by reduction of reported incidents, 100% of classes earning #PRIDE Points and a minimum of 30 students will be trained as Junior Coaches for recess. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Recess games participation, OORS, Classroom Dojo Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a small school, teacher teams have established strong collegiality and meet regularly in an informal manner. However, as the school continues to grow by adding a grade each year, It has been determined that teachers need to develop a stronger understanding of the curriculum across all grades as how each year’s standards build upon the next and are an extension of the prior year’s. As such, teacher teams have also noted a need to formalize a structure to ensure vertical alignment and support teacher understanding of the skills for both the prerequisite and subsequent grade. To date, our collegiality and the principal's distributive style of leadership has resulted in a strong sense of ownership by all staff and high levels of collaboration. Each team has a designated leader who is the point person for planning, resources, and turn keying instructional initiatives. We also have six teacher leaders (Model Teachers) that serve as the point people for math, literacy, special education and ESL. They provide coaching, support in creating unit and lesson plans, and demonstrations. It is our belief that our collegiality will be the X factor in our becoming the best school we know we can provide for our students and their families. This model also serves to educate our students; they see their teachers collaborating and supporting one another and have firsthand observation of how to work with others who may be different, have different ideas, and can push your thinking. We strive to continue this structure, and strengthen this structure, as we grow our school from K-4 to K-5 in this school year. This also provides tremendous support for our incoming teachers and creates a sustainable organization that is driven by mission and vision - not solely the directive of the school leader. Our long term goal is to build sufficient capacity in house to reduce the number of outside consultants providing professional development and to reduce the frequency of our consultants' visits. Part of building this capacity is the appointment of model teachers to support colleagues in literacy or math. Model teachers are assigned to push in to newer teachers' classrooms to provide support and pull small groups (which also supports our goal of increasing rigorous instruction in the Tier 1 setting). 4  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of classroom and cluster teachers will shift their practice as a result of their participation in at least one cycle of in house instructional support from a model teacher or literacy coach as evidenced by a rating of effective/highly effective on Danielson's component 4e. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? INSTRUCTIONAL PROGRAMS/PD: Teachers July 2018 - June 2019 Principal Model teachers/literacy coach will demonstrate and coach in during a lesson with a gradual release approach to increase capacity. Model Teachers will also read Agents of Change and be part of semi-monthly coaching meetings. SYSTEMS/STRUCTURES: Teachers July 2018 - June 2019 Principal Programming includes periods for push-in and common meeting times STRATEGIES: Establishment of cycles to strategically address high leverage area of growth Teachers PARENT COLLABORATION: Family Instructional Mornings allow parents to visit classrooms in real time to allow for transparency of teacher development (and instructional practices). Families July 2018- June 2019 July 2018 - June 2019 Coach, principal Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families are engaged through regular communication between school and home, for example: 1. Family Conferences (each quarter) 2. Weekly Workshops with Guidance Counselor 3. Talk with Teachers Tuesdays (Momentito con Los Maestros Martes) 4. Monthly Coffee with the Principal 5. School Website/App - Parent Coordinator 6. Social Media (Facebook) - Parent Coordinator 6  7. School Newsletter (Student run with Faculty Advisors) 8. Principal presentations at PTA (monthly) 9. Quarterly workshops for families in the evening 10. Family Instructional Mornings - parents are welcomed into the classroom one day each month to observe instruction 11. Parent Leader Volunteers - after training, volunteers work in the classrooms during instructional times to support the teachers with administrative tasks. This creates greater transparency and allows parents to see instruction in real time. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tuesday 35 minute meeting time PTA and SLT meeting Monday's PLC Fair Student Funding for programming to cover teachers in student "Town Hall" program so each grade can have an additional PLC period each Friday for common planning and inquiry. Common planning times Funds for Model Teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored in February of 2019 to determine impact of the model teachers/literacy coach on colleagues' practice. Coaches will also be part of semi-monthly coaching meetings to support their practice in shifting teacher practice. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson MOTP rating for 4e Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The strength of the current school leader is in the area of distributive leadership and relationship building. Prior to working as principal, she worked as a community organizer and negotiates multiple perspectives and interest groups very well. Trust is high in our community, as indicated by the School Survey. A growth area is in the scope of supervision. Relying heavily on leveraging the mission/vision, which has served well in creating a new school, the principal would benefit from ongoing growth in providing timely and succinct feedback via Danielson, instead of relying more heavily on instructional memos. With the addition of an assistant principal position in the 2018-2019 school year, the principal will be further enabled to support cycles of learning to push instructional practices and to monitor teacher learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal will complete 100% of all observations and give actionable feedback to increase student outcomes in a timely manner as evidenced by MOTP Completions Report in ADVANCE. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? INSTRUCTION/PD: Monthly calibration at PLC's around practices and components of Danielson. Principal, teachers August 2018 - June 2019 Principal/Assistant Principal SYSTEMS/STRUCTURES: Shared observation schedule with targeted cycles. STRATEGIES: Calibration between principal and assistant principal around ratings. Collaborative observations and feedback sessions until calibration is ensured. FAMILY ENGAGEMENT: N/A Principal, Assistant Principal Principal, Assistant Principal August 2018 - June 2019 Principal/Assistant Principal August 2018 - June 2019 Principal/Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Principal will regularly share overall patterns in MOTP findings with the School Leadership Team. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monday PLC times Semi-Monthly meetings with Model Teachers/Coaches Observation schedule with weekly benchmarks Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 9  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Principal will complete 50% of all MOTP observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Observation Schedule & MOTP Progress report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 329Q has a very interested and engaged group of parents who are highly concerned about the academic progress of their children. However, families would benefit from additional training with respect to understanding the expectations for their children’s progress and the impact of the arts/music on their children’s academic progress. Through greater, consistent, and more meaningful interactions with families, student performance is likely to improve and parents are in a superior position to advocate for the academic success of their children. Additionally, parents are becoming very well versed on reading levels and how to support their children to move in their reading levels. This has been done through numerous workshops and even a visit to Teachers College for a parent training on literacy. However, our families have become so focused on reading levels that the promotion of love of reading has not been fully actualized. To address this issue, our 2017-2018 SLT decided upon a schoolwide reading initiative, One Book, One School. As such, the entire school community will read the same book in the late fall/early winter. The book will be available in multiple languages. The book will be read aloud, discussed, re-enacted, celebrated and shared in the following spaces: Town Hall, Coffee with the Principal, PTA meetings, SLT meetings, classroom literacy periods, and through our social media. The goal is for the book to be read and enjoyed by every member of our community in order to celebrate the love of reading, for the sake of reading and the enjoyment one has from reading the experiences of others. As well, we hope to provide children the opportunity to read more with their parents and to see their parents reading at home. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of families will read the chosen text for One School, One Book and participated in at least one book event as evidenced by sign in sheets and agendas. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). PROGRAMS: Literacy Coach and Grade 4 Special Education Teacher will train teachers during Monday PLC in November. They will also train our Parent Coordinator and Parent Leaders in November. We will work with literacy model teachers to support roll out. Assistant Principal will work with Parent Coordinator to create schoolwide displays and social media supports to promote reading the book. STRATEGIES: Through parent engagement workshops and social media promote roll out and importance of reading as a family and in children seeing their parents reading at home. Audio books will be available for parents with limited literacy and for students/families with special needs and/or learning English. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Families July 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Literacy Coach Families August 2018 -June 2019 Parent Coordinator STRUCTURES: Parent Coordinator will keep attendance of all participating families and offer incentives to families with high levels of participation. All Families August 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. One School, One Book Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, Title I Parent Engagement Money, Parent Leaders volunteers, Literacy Coach, Grade 4 Special Education Teacher Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By December 2019, all books will be disseminated and all events planned. By April 2019, the SLT will review impact based on parent surveys and informal feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Coordinator's Attendance Record, parent surveys conducted by SLT Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) TC Running Records Benchmarks Mathematics Math inventories End of unit assessments SS notebooks, on demand writing Mandated or at-risk behaviors Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Leveled Literacy Intervention, Additional guided reading groups, After School targeted groups for ELL's and struggling readers Small group "mini-lessons), targeted games Scaffolded support during independent/partner work time Scaffolded support during independent/partner work time Crisis, trauma, behavior support Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the day and on after school Small group School Day Small group School Day Small group School Day Small group or one to one School Day and After School 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 4 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Uniforms, school supplies, regular outreach by guidance counselor and parent coordinator Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. RECRUIT: Colleagues provide referrals for highly qualified teachers; must be multiply certified to work in our school community RETENTION: Grade level teams provide support and camaraderie; teacher voice allows for meaningful engagement SUPPORT: work with high level professional developers (Teachers College, Metamorphosis, Professor from Queens College, visits to successful schools) 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Highly supportive teacher teams, Monday’s PLC, monthly PD calendars, consultants from Metamorphosis and Teachers College, PD from the American Reading Company and NY Historical Society, literacy/leadership consultant. PLC is differentiated based on teacher need, years teaching, and years as part of our school communtiy. Each month a calendar is created with input from staff and share with the community. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/a 7  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). All children during pre-registration are given a K Readiness Assessment. Children who score low are offered a seat in our K Readiness program over the summer (30 seats available). Teachers work on school behaviors, writing names, letter recognition, counting, shapes, colors, and socialization. Our Guidance Counselor also provides LISTO! - a school readiness program for 2 - 4 year siblings of current students 2x/week. She incorporates centers, read aloud, and instruction of the Spanish/English alphabet. This also supports our families' awareness of the skills needed prior to attending kindergarten. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers use the TCRWP Assessments, documented in Assessment Pro for all decisions around instruction, small group work, teaching points, and intervention with regard to literacy. They also use the rubrics and writing exemplars from Pathways for Teaching Writing to benchmark progress in writing. Teachers have an additional professional period on Friday mornings to examine student work, conference notes, and assessment results to determine next steps. The Child Study Team also meets weekly to review requests from teachers for additional support (interventions, at-risk services, extra-curricular activities, etc.) 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 8  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 237649 0 21582 0 3319052 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X . X . X Column B Section Reference(s) 5C . 5E . 5A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 9  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 329Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 329Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 1  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 329Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 3  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 4  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 5  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 6  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: 50% of our students are English Language Learners whose families came recently to the U.S. Within our instructional program, students are actively engaged in an arts infused balanced literacy program. This includes visual thinking strategies, or VTS, where students observe and dialogue around a different painting each week, using 3 questions: What's going on in the picture? What do you see that makes you say that? What more can we find? This serves three purposes: 1. developing oral language and building vocabulary 2. exposing children and engaging them in prominent works of art 3. building the skill of formulating an opinion and backing up with facts. While we do use both ESL methodology and the 50-50 dual language model, many of our students benefit from additional time to work with foundations of language. Additionally, we create extensive space for families to learn about and participate in our instructional program, through curriculum workshops and Learning Leaders. As such, we have created a Saturday Arts Program and after school enrichment/supplemental programs. Using the TCWRP assessments (tracked in Assessment Pro), we focus on our bottom third of students in grades K - 5. Our Response to Intervention Team (RtI Team) also provides small group supports targeted to the needs of the students identified as in need through progress monitoring in Assessment Pro. Our ESL Coordinator, Isabel Vercosa, leads our Data Team to monitor reading levels and student progress. Teachers use Leveled Literacy Intervention, Wilson Fundations, and teacher created materials to address fluency, comprehension, phonemic awareness and comprehension. We believe early childhood is the most important time to focus on gaps in student performance - as the gap is the smallest and this is the time when children acquire a foundation for all future learning. Specifically, data for our ELL students is tracked by reading level in Assessment Pro and measured against benchmarks set by the assessment tool's creators. We look to target students whose reading levels show them to be at level 2 (approaching grade level) and below. LITERACY INSTRUCTION (ESL AND DUAL LANGUAGE): Many teachers in our school are licensed in both ESL/bilingual and general education. To support all learners in acquiring English (and Spanish, in the dual classes), teachers provide supports through numerous ESL methodologies, including tapping into prior knowledge, acting our known stories, and pictures cues. The incorporation of the arts into daily literacy instruction also provides additional visual cues for learners and has yielded tremendous results in building academic language that translates into their reading and writing work. Students receive 12 periods/week of arts infused literacy instruction that includes lyric study, painting study, classical music study, reading workshop, writing workshop, word work (Fundations and/or Estrellita), shared reading and guided reading/strategy groups. Materials needed include: leveled books, Internet access, SMART Board technology, shared reading pieces, word walls, art response journals, Wilson Fundations, and writing materials 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information SATURDAY ARTS: Classes are 26 weeks of the school year from 9:00- 2:00. Students can also take classes in dance, piano, harp and guitar. While academic classes are vital to supporting our ENL's, We also believe in the power of the arts to motivate, celebrate and provide context for learning language. Our folkloric dance troupe, Calpulli, also provides a space for Spanish speaking families to build community and to celebrate their cultural background. Many students from our dual language program participate in the Calpulli dance classes and presentations. Those in the bottom third also have 120 minutes of literacy instruction, with an emphasis on word work and guided reading. Teachers also pre-teach the lyric study and painting of the week (VTS) to provide students with a stronger entry point when their classroom teacher introduces it on Monday. There will be 25 sessions with 2 teachers. Both teachers are certified in ESL and/or Bilingual education. Students will address the modality of reading through Wilson Fundations double dose, guided reading, and shared reading in targeted groups. Writing will be supported through both interactive writing activities in small groups and additional practice in the writing workshop. Listening is supported through students' lyric study and dialogue around painting study. Materials include: Wilson Fundations kits, SMART Board, writing center supplies (paper choices, writing implements), laptops, leveled texts, and shared reading pieces. Students in grades 1 - 3 are targeted but will be grouped by reading level (i.e., level C - D students together, etc.) in three classes with no more than a 15:1 ratio. AFTERSCHOOL: Those in the bottom third also have 50 minutes of literacy instruction, with an emphasis on word work and guided reading. Teachers also pre-teach the lyric study and painting of the week (VTS) to provide students with a stronger entry point when their classroom teacher introduces it on Monday. There will be 25 sessions with 4 teachers. All teachers are certified in ESL and/or Bilingual education. Students will address the modality of reading through Wilson Fundations double dose, guided reading, and shared reading in targeted groups. Writing will be supported through both interactive writing activities in small groups and additional practice in the writing workshop. Listening is supported through students' lyric study and dialogue around painting study. Materials include: Wilson Fundations kits, SMART Board, writing center supplies (paper choices, writing implements), laptops, leveled texts, and shared reading pieces. Students in grades K-5 are targeted but will be grouped by reading level (i.e., level C - D students together, etc.) in four classes with no more than a 15:1 ratio. Classes are throughout the week from 2:40 - 3:40. Both programs will maintain attendance records. For the Saturday program, our Parent Coordinator calls families to remind them of class on Friday afternoons and follows up on Monday for absent students. All students receive a letter explaining the program in English and Spanish. All Saturday and after school activities are conducted in English. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 0  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: P.S. 329 professional development plans for Title III program teachers and support staff will take place throughout the 2018 - 2019 school year. All ESL, Dual Language, Special education, and General education teachers will be provided these opportunities to support delivery of instruction for all ELL students. Each Monday afternoon and Friday morning, teachers are provided the opportunity to work in their grade level PLC support the cycle of: what do children need to learn? How do we know if they have learned it? What do we do if they don't learn? What do we do if already know it? Teachers use their cycle to design rubrics and assessments, look at student work, and modify instructional practices based on student learning. These sessions total 80 throughout the school year. Working with our professional development partner, Teachers College, students work specifically on strategies for raising student outcomes in reading (as per the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Assessment) and writing (as per Teachers College Writing Continuum). Because each classroom has over 50% English Language Learners (and also most students speak another language in addition to English at home), all literacy based professional learning and planning must accommodate for our ELL's. This year's foci include: On demand writing, targeted/strategic small groups, and maximizing conferring with students. These were chosen to support our community of ELL's to provide necessary supports in the Tier 1 setting that enhances student growth. Each session is 80 minutes (Monday) and 50 minutes (Friday). Dual Language teachers also partner with ENIL trainers from the American Reading Company, working specifically on strategies for small group instruction based on Spanish and English reading levels. The consultant also works with the Teachers College units of study to support teachers in providing a coherent instructional program in both languages. RtI: We have opted to maximize our resources by hiring a teacher to provide additional ESL support through small group and pushing in to classrooms with high need. Additionally, teachers with free periods have been organized to provide Tier 2 supports to students indicated by reading levels using the Leveled Literacy Intervention program. This is a research based program with built in professional development and progress monitoring that has shown to result in growth for students learning English and students who struggle. Teachers College consultants will work with the grade teams and additionally with our dual language teachers to develop effective units of study and assessment practices that reinforce instruction of ELL students monthly for a total of 17 sessions. Teachers receive additional support on curriculum days where the team plans out units of study and assessment procedures to impact ELL students. Teachers also complete visitations with other schools to compare best practices each semester during the school year. Specifically, PS 329Q has partnered with PS 149Q (neighboring D30 school with a long standing dual language program) to observe and collaborate to implement best practices. The professional learning opportunities will support our ELL's by strengthening our teachers' capacity to deliver tier 1 interventions and, most specifically, by maximizing our small group instructional practices to meet our ELL's at their current entry points. Each professional learning opportunity will be recorded with both an attendance sheet and guided with an agenda. 1  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Engagement Opportunities targeted towards parents of ENL's take place throughout the 2018-2019 school year to support parents and increase academic proficiency of all ENL students. By connecting with parents in the school community it will positively impact our ENL students. Each month, parents are invited to Family Instructional Morning, where families can observe classroom practices. Each month there is a family calendar distributed to parents that offers different parent workshops to support students in English Language Arts, Mathematics, and the Arts. Example topics that will be covered are improving literacy skills in school and at home, reading behaviors according to levels, word work, utilizing technology as a resource, and supporting students in writing reading responses at home. In Mathematics, parents will learn different ways to assist their children and align home and school instruction, Common Core standards, and homework help. Additional topics will be developed according to parent and student needs after receiving parent feedback. Parents are also invited to participate in the Arts with their child during Talk with Teacher Tuesdays and Saturday Arts program provided by Art and Music teachers. There is also a pre-intervention mommy and me program to target families early and develop relationships with parents (LISTO!). Technology and nutrition classes are provided to parents on a weekly basis to support their learning. Parents will be notified of these activities through our Facebook page, school website, Kinvolved and family calendar. A student created monthly newsletter is given to families to celebrate school-wide activities and ideas. Translation and interpretation arrangements are made in writing through our bilingual Parent Coordinator. With presentations and meetings, most staff in the school community are bilingual and are available to provide language support to families as needed. No one is left with a questioned unanswered or concern unheard because of a language barrier. While Spanish is the most prominent language, we also have staff who are bilingual in Cantonese, Mandarin, and Haitian Creole. We coordinate with our bilingual families to support Arabic speakers and also utilize translation services. FAMILY WORKSHOPS and PARENT LEADERS: Parents have the opportunity to become trained volunteers through the Learning Leaders program. They serve as recess volunteers, classroom volunteers, and hall monitors. All these activities increase transparency of school activities, build familiarity of the instructional program, increase rapport with teachers, and create a strong connection between home and school. For students whose family works during the day, they too have the opportunity to build connections with the mothers and grandmothers of their peers, thus increasing the breadth of the proverbial "village." We also provide monthly workshops on all aspects of the curriculum. Parent participation is tracked by the Parent Coordinator through sign in sheets and a tracking spreadsheet. Through our "Parent Leaders" initiative, parents have the opportunity to earn "swag" through the points they accumulate by attending events. For example, families can earn East Elmhurst Community School T-shirts, bags, pens, water bottles and mugs. This both encourages families to participate and supports school spirit. 2 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. =60% (~13,000) After School Academic Support for ENL's: 4 teachers x 65 hours/year = 13,000 =10% (2158) American Reading Company ENIL Support 7 days PD x 2000/day = $14000 Title I = 11,842 Title III = 2158 After School Program: leveled readers, copy paper, folders, writing supplies Parent Engagement: Kinvolved to communicate in multiple languages with families (in house staff provide translation) Kinvolved for Year Subscription = $2702 Title I = 544 Title III = 2158 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $13,000.00  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff $2158.00 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other $4,316.00 0 0 $2158.00 TOTAL $21,582.00 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name East Elmhurst Community School Borough Queens School Number 329 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Rachel Staroba Coach Gloria Bastone ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Isabel Vercosa Teacher/Subject Area Yocely Nava Teacher/Subject Area Daisy Mendez Related-Service Provider Marjorie James Superintendent Philip Composto Assistant Principal n/a Coach n/a School Counselor Margarida Guilarte Parent Paulina Osorio Parent Coordinator Karolyhn Obando Field Support Center Staff Member Jenny An Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 6 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 450 4 Total number of ELLs 200 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 44.44%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 1 4 0 1 1 3 0 1 1 2 0 1 1 5 0 1 1 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 6 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? East Elmhurst Community School uses the TCRWP assessments and the accompanying tool, Assessment Pro, to track and monitor results at both the classroom and school level. Students are assessed by the classroom teacher a minimum of three times per year as a universal assessment. In the dual language classes, these assessments are also done in Spanish. Teachers also administer alternative texts for running records when growth is noted through formative assessment (conferring and guided reading groups). This data provides teachers with clear next steps for each reader/writer, directs student goals, and drives teaching points when larger class trends are noted. Students classified as ELL's in the dual language class, overall, make progress in their L1 first, with growth in the L2 (English) following. ELL's not making adequate progress in either are referred for Saturday Academy, additional guided reading, and, lastly, RTI services to support their growth. To date, teachers use the data to reorganize the pacing calendar for introducing sight words addressed at each reading level and, in the dual classes, teachers have reorganized the Estrellita order of sounds to correspond with the Fundations order of letter introduction. 5  As of December 2015, 38% of our ELL students were reading at/above grade level as the per TCRWP assessments; this is compared with 53% of our non-ELL's. With a 15 percentage disparity, this data tells us that our ELL's are not quite performing at the same academic level as their more English proficient peers and that, as a community, we have much more targeted instructional work to do. Through the School Leadership Team, as well as our instructional team, we have made several decisions that impact our community both for this and next year. As a growing new school, we are constantly reshaping our program based upon data and impact of instructional practices: This year (2015 - 16): 1. Deeper inquiry around reading levels, including supporting teacher development around knowledge of variation among reading levels and miscue analysis. In this way, teachers can provide very targeted small group instruction during guided reading/strategy groups. Before, teachers taught around a text. Now, they look at the specifics of the skills related to a leveled text, the child's miscue analysis and they teach into the skills that provides the greatest leverage for movement to the next reading level. (Reference: "Matching Books to Readers" by TCWRP) 2. Increased reading time for second grade. This has allowed teachers to meet with two or more groups each day and to confer with individual students. 3. Shifting the scope and sequence for Fundations. Students were given the mid-term exam in October. Results were tallied/analyzed and the scope of grades 1-2 Fundations were shifted to meet the needs of struggling ELL students. Next year (2016 - 17): 1. Creation of ELL/RTI Coordinator position. This teacher will provide small group instruction to both ELL's and students who struggle using the Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy research based system. We have used this program for the past two years with great success. This person will also coordinate ELL compliance and oversee the progress of ELL students, turnkey ELL data to teachers with recommendations for shift in practice, and push into classrooms for additional small group instruction, especially with entering and emerging ELL's. 2. Incorporation of Month by Month Phonics. While Fundations provides concrete skills and strategies for visual decoding/encoding, it lacks the explicit structural instruction our ELL students need. In working with our consultants from Teachers College, grade level teams will deliver a hybrid of the two programs, tailored for the needs of each ELL, to support whole language acquisition and stronger transfer of skills to the Reading and Writing Workshops. 3. Requirement for Language Teaching Point, in addition to the content Teaching Point. Again, this will be driven by teachers' work with our ELL/RtI Coordinator via their analysis of ELL data from the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, and TCWRP Assessment. 4. Departmentalization of grades 1 - 3. This will allow regrouping of classes based on subject area needs and more targeted small group work by the content specialist teachers. For example, while ELL's might benefit from a mixed class during science or social studies, a smaller class for reading and writing would better support their needs for scaffolding, home language instruction, and language specific instructional practices - especially our entering and emerging ELL's. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success of our ESL methodology and Dual Language instructional programs are measured most strongly by student progress in reading and writing in English. While DL provides and enrichment opportunity for bilingualism, biculturalism, and biliteracy, the ulimate goal for all programs is procificiency in English, as this is the primary language of assessment for the State. It is our 6  belief as a school community, and supported by research, that our Spanish speaking ELL's benefit tremendously from simulataneous L1/L2 instruction in the dual language program for two reasons: 1. Students may continue to acquire skills, strategies and content knowledge while learning the L2. 2. Students with stronger command of their L1 are more easily able to transfer their skills to their L2. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We strictly adhere to the benchmarks provided by the TCRWP. If students are not at the prescribed benchmarks, they are recommended for our Saturday program and receive additional small group instruction in the classroom. Students who are not at grade level benchmarks with the tier 1 supports by early winter, are recommended for RtI support twice weekly in leveled groups, using Fountas and Pinnell's Leveled Literacy Intervention. While language is often at the root of the delay or struggle, we still provide as many supports as possible for our ELL's to push them towards the grade level benchmarks. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. As a school community, we have begun to incorporate more writing on demand with open ended prompts, especially in Social Studies. NYSESLAT data has indicated that students, trained in the writing workshop, need additional supports with non-fiction writing and creating a piece in one period of instruction. This has been incorporated into the content areas of science and social studies, as well as providing additional time in the literacy block, such as reading responses. Additionally, we are working with our Teachers College consultant to rely more upon "On Demand" writing samples from students as the measure of student learning (in place of our "Published" pieces, which rely heavily on teacher scaffolding and guidance. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The students are grouped in mixed proficiency levels across all classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Th e students are grouped in mixed proficiency levels across all classes. The instruction is delivered in the roller coaster model across ELA and all content areas. Students receive the allotted instruction time according to the New York State ELL/ENL model in conjunction with the students current proficiency levels. These results come from the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT test results. The ELL/ENL teacher Jessica Baity is in charge of ELA and creating schedules for the allotted time as per CR Part 154.2. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 7  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Half of our students are classified as English Language Learners although nearly all of our students, despite possibily passing the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT, speak another language or languages in addition to English at home, church, and/or the mosque. As such, ENL Methodology is paramount to all instructional work in our community in order to meet the needs of all language learners becuase these supports are needed to preserve the proficiency of English and the native language if in Dual Language classes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Dual Language - we use a self-contained model with alternating language days. Teachers support the use of translanguaging, especially in early stages of language acquisition, to support student expression and as an opportunity for the teacher or peers to reframe in the day's target language. Teachers also utilize the same ESL methodology in both languages to support language acquisition. ESL/ENL Model - we have mixed ability classes where students acquire language and receive language support from one another. With multiply certified teachers and push-in support, students also benefit from small group instruction, pre-teaching, and (as in DL classes) ESL Methodology. Strategies from ESL Methodology we use across all classes, with emphasis on our ELL's: 1. Pre-teachering vocabulary 2. Pre-teaching concepts in the L1 for easier transition to the L2 3. Translanguaging, where students may produce in their L1 to reflect their receptive understanding of L2 content. Over time, they are able to produce more in the L2 without the L1 support. 4. TPR - total physical response, where students and teachers use gestures, acting out, and physical movement to reinforce communication in the L2. 5. Small group work, with explicit language skills embedded 6. Access to the information/content in the L1 via texts and/or video 7. Non-textual visuals with entry points for all language learners; We use daily painting study as a pre-cursor to early literacy skills such as main idea/details, compare/contrast and fact/opinion. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students receive the allotted instruction time according to the New York State ESL/ENL model in conjunction with the students current proficiency levels. These results come from the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT test results. The ESL/ENL teacher Jessica Baity is in charge of creating schedules for the allotted time as per CR Part 154.2. With 5 out of 15 teachers bilingually certified, we have the in house staff to conduct running records in the home language to ensure progress in the L1 and to ascertain content/skill knowledge; we know this will later be transferred to English with time and small group support. In the Dual Language program all formal and informal assessments in ELA are done using both Spanish and English running recordes. Benchmarks and diagnostic assessments are translated into the home language to make sure students are bein appropriately evaluated. Informal assessments are conducted by assessing students in the home langauge along with all progress screeners. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. We have no SIFE students at this time. If we were to receive a SIFE student in the second grade, this child would benefit from small group work with a push-in teacher, the use of technology to reinforce content in the L1, and possible placement in 8  the dual language class (if Spanish were the L1). We would also refer this student to our Saturday I HEART Reading Club and our after school program through Roads to Success. b. Newcomers with Spanish dominance are placed in the dual language program to have support in the L1, in addition to ES/ENL methodology. Newcomers in the ESL/ENL class are provided the required 360 minutes/week of in class/push in support in small group settings. c. Developing students are provided more targeted instructional work, depending upon their NYSITELL/NYSESLAT scores, language proficiencies in the L1 and L2, and the the results of their running record. Teachers work with the ELL Team Leader to review needed areas of support and in which modalities (usually in writing). These students might also be referred for RtI if on the cusp of attaining grade level and/or reaching "commanding" level of proficiency. d. Long-Term - we have no long-term ELL's at this time. As we grow, should we have long-term ELL's again, the key is to pinpoint and diagnose the skills/strategies that are preventing progress. These needs should be addressed through small group work, Saturday classes, and a possible referral for RtI services. If the child is presenting as proficient in the L1, but struggling in the L2, we can use translanguaging and leverage the home language to reinforce English skills. if the child struggles in both the L1 and L2, despite extensive interventions based on targeted diagnoses, we would consider a referral for evaluation with the consent of the family. e. Former ELL's can have just as many needs are our current ELL's, as they are still going to struggle with CALPS, despite mastering BICS. Teachers continue to provide mandated support and accomodations for 2 years after demonstrating "commanding" proficiency on the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The core of our instructional materials is the leveled library. Each classroom has a library, separated into fiction/non-fiction by each Fountas and Pinnell level needed by students in the classroom community. Dual Language classrooms have both English and Spanish fiction/non-fiction for student reading levels. All classrooms utilize the Fundations phonics support program, with Dual Language also incorporating sonidos from the Estrellita program. As we write our own math curriculum, with the support of Lucy West's Metamorphosis consulting group, classroom teachers create all materials in the necessary languages, with the necessary visual supports. Science, Social Studies, Music, and Art are all instructed in English with ESL supports, high arts integration (for multiple entry points of learners at all levels,) vocabulary support and multiple visuals. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Across all 3 classrooms on each grade, we have students who are ELL's and who are SWD's. They are placed in class based upon who that student is as a learner, not solely the classification. For example, in our 12:1:1, we have one student who struggles with literacy, but excels in math. His IEP program is 15 periods of ELA in 12:1:1, 6 periods of Math in ICT, and the remaining subjects in the general education setting. As a small school, we are able to offer highly tailored instructional programs with strong oversights and progress monitoring. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted intervention programs are available for all content areas. The classroom teachers provide targeted small group interventions when needed and adjust their groups accordingly to fit student needs. RTI interventions are provided for ENL/ELL students in need during these blocks of interevention time to support reading, writing, and content area work. Push-in and pull-ut services are utilized. At risk speech is also available for any language concerns. Wilson Fundations is used to support phonics work along with the balanced literacy T/C program. Fountas and Pinnel leveled intervention instruction is also used to target at risk students in the pull out model. Science and Social Studies supports take place during small group instruction by the classroom teacher who scaffold and differentiates instruction to best support the students. As a K-2 school, we emphasise ELA most heavily in our interventions. The following interventions are offered to our ELL's, all in English only: 1. RtI (Leveled Literacy Intervention) - twice weekly, for 30 minutes in a highly targeted group of 4 students grouped by 9  level. This is a pull-out program. These same students receive guided reading/strategy groups in the classroom twice weekly as well. 2. Saturday I HEART Reading Club - students work in small groups of 15 or less to address deficiencies and receive explicit language instruction for 2 hours each Saturday morning. Students are selected based on ELL status and reading level. 3. Summer I HEART Reading programs - these include K Readiness, targeted instruction for our incoming ELL's to get them on the right track (this is the only program offered in both languages, English/Spanish); literacy invervention is also offered to ELL's based on reading levels (not grade levels). 4. Spanish Club: This time gives an opportunity to support students with native language instruction. 5. Science: Small group instruction twice weekly in a push-in model targeting ELL's content of vocabulary. 6. Social Studies: Small group instruction twice weekly in a push-in model targeting ELL's context of vocabulary. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming year we want to improve our instruction across all grades in small groups that will increase progress for our ELL students. We are looking to incorporate a technology-based program into the classroom to support ELL students during writing, and make sure across ELA we are informally and formally assessing the students reading level as frequently as possible to push our readers. We will be providing professional development around explicit teaching and differentiation small group work in ENL time. Professional development calendars will be providing more options for teachers to specify their needs around ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No services will be discontinued at this time because we need access to all of our current programs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ENL’s are afforded equal access to all programs and they make up a large portion of our school population. All ENL’s receive all documents in two languages and are provided opportunities to interpreters if necessary along with their their parents. After school programs enforcing literacy, arts, music, and physical education are offered to all students. The Roads to Success after school program exists within the school and all ENL students are offered access to a Saturday academy to support literacy and language acquisition. We have a reader’s theatre program that supports the many needs of our ELLs conducted by our speech therapists and a Dual Language Spanish club to meet the needs of those learners. We have a chorus program, music instrumental program, and Calpulli dance program where all parents are notified and able to get information in two languages. Children are given the opportunity to celebrate the universal language of music. ENL students are given choices as to what afterschool opporutnies they would like to be involved in. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELL’s are provided many instructional materials to support their learning. The following materials include but not limited too are laptop computers, Smartboard materials, books on tape, big books and read alouds, listening and interactive online activities, story CD’s, music and VTS lyric study, and compositions. Parents are also provided access to our online website to support with homework and other materials. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is provided in our ENL program whenever possible and we have a high percentage of certified ESL/ENL staff that can meet the needs of our learners. We have bilingual staff that sit in for meetings and trained teachers to support in this area. Across our school we have a bilingual parent coordinator, bilingual office staff, and paraprofessionals who are also native langauge speakers. Parent translators are provided for all acitvities and interactions within the school. In each program model, the teacher reinforces ENL/ESL metholodgy to increase language development. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services and instructional materials will meet the students’ age and grade levels with a high level of engagement and academic rigor. Teachers develop units of study that are tailored to all of the kids’ specific learning needs across ELA academic 0  periods. The materials are developed to developmentally support and improve the appropriate grade level skills and strategies while differentiating for all of the ENL/ESL students. Leveled libraries are made appropriate to each grade and classroom and materials used in all of our cross-curricular studies are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELL’s are provided many instructional materials to support their learning. The following materials include but not limited too are laptop computers, Smartboard materials, books on tape, big books and read alouds, listening and interactive online activities, story CD’s, music and VTS lyric study, and compositions. Parents are also provided access to our online website to support with homework and other materials. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to transition new students into our school, all kindergarten students are provided a tour and parent orientation with their teachers before the official start of the school day in the summer. All new students are given a tour by a trained and certified teacher or the principal as they enter the school and introduced to the different teachers across the grade. All ENL students are paired up with a partner in each classroom to adjust and assist them in their new school environment. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? This does not apply. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. In our dual language program across grades kindergarten through second grade the 50/50 model is used in a self-contained dual language classroom. 50 percent of the day is in English and 50 percent of the day. EP's and ELL's are integrated for the full school day. b. Content Areas are taught in English and Literacy is taught in both the native language and English. c. Each language is separated for instruction by the day of the week and the class period time. d. Emergent literacy is taught in both the home language and English to support language acquisition of both languages as they are taught equally distributed throughout the week. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development: This school year a lot of professional development will/ is built around building up our instructional practices on being able to utilize small group time across all content areas to push our ENL students. Grade teams will also be working closely to see how they can support ENL students during literacy by looking at the strategies they need and/or are missing in order to push them 1  to the next level. Our school will also encompass more professional development around using the arts/lyric study to support the ENL learners and develop vocabulary and cognitive thinking skills in the second language. As our professional development continues, we will also prepare for the upcoming year by developing successful co-teaching strategies to push our ENL learners across classrooms with a focus on balanced literacy. Instruction will also review strategies for successful second language acquisition and ways to improve content-based instructions. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We have not gotten to the point pf transitioning ELLs at this time since we are currently only serving K-2 students but will be building transitioning ELLs into middle school as we grow until full capacity. In order to meet the professional development (PD) requirements as per CR Part 154.2 the following will happen: Each month the teachers will receive ELL specific professional development that will begin during Professional Learning Communities starting in October. A sign-in sheet will be utilized to record topic areas and feedback sheets will be used in order to make sure teachers are receiving necessary feedback. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? All ENL teachers support their students and families by keeping records and calling parents regarding student progress. Teachers set weekly appointments with parents during parent engagement time to discuss goals, language development, and assessment results. Parents are welcomed to come in for literacy workshops and introductory open houses explaining development needs of the students in each applicable program. At all meetings, parents are provided with translators if necessary. If parents are unable to attend progress monitoring meetings regarding their child or a particular program, they will be contacted by phone using translators if needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parent involvement is increasing as our school continues to grow. P.S. 329 provides the initial orientation meeting to all ELL parents along with an open house to entering kindergarten students in early September. Parents who do not attend will be followed up with phone calls, letters, and the opportunity to come in and meet the ENL coordinator Jessica Baity. Both interpretors on phone calls and letters will be sent home in both the home language and English. Parents will be informed of any services their child will receive and the possibility of any additional resources to support their child. (CR part 154, extended services, afterschool programs) Parents are invited to attend and provided with a calendar to attend coffee with the principal to discuss academic supports, literacy workshops, math workshops, and family nights. All materials and resources are sent out in both Spanish and English. Parents are invited to attend Calpulli Dance with their students, Saturday School, and Family Arts which all supports language development and provides students with hands-on learning opportunities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2  3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rachel Staroba-hallenb, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Rachel Staroba Title Principal n/a Assistant Principal Karolyn Obando Parent Coordinator Veronica Alburquerque ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jessica Roldan Parent Jessica Baity Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Gloria Bastone Dr. Philip Composto Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/05/2016 1/05/2016 1/05/2016 1/05/2016 1/05/2016 1/05/2016 1/05/2016 1/05/2016 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q329 School Name: East ElmhurstCommunity School Superintendent: Dr. Philip Comp The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary). Isabel Vercosa ESL provider Yes (Nov. 2018) Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. East Elmhurst Community School uses Home Language Identification Survey and Emergency Blue Cards to identify preferred language of communication, both written and oral, for parents in our community. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic 6 1.28 % 6 1.28% 6  Chinese English Spanish 3 175 282 0.64% 37.47% 60.39% 3 166 291 0.64% 35.55% 62.31% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A (2018-2019) Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Sep. 2018 Sep. 2018 Dec. 2018 Nov. 2018 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. in house translation translated documents available on Intranet in house translation in house translation School's Handbook Blue Cards School's newspaper Movie night flier 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Meet the Teacher night September/ annually Parent-Teacher conference December, March and May Tuesdays Parent engagement time Weekly meetings interpretation service(s)? over-the-phone interpreter services, school over-the-phone interpreter services, school personnel over-the-phone interpreter services, school personnel 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 7  East Elmhurst Community School uses Robocall (an over the phone communication system) and the school's app to communicate with parents in the event of an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Language Access coordinator will turn key with staff and share resources giving at training. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) East Elmhurst Community School will use the multilingual 'Welcome Poster' to remind parents that our school can assist them in their preferred language. We will also have the 'Parent's Guide to Language Access Brochure' available to parents with the "I Speak" card to be use by parents to request language services in their preferred language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? East Elmhurst Community School will conduct parents' survey on how to help parents with language assistance. Feedback from survey will be shared among staff in order to improve services and communication between parents and school staff. 8 
