 School Name: 24Q330 P.S. 330 Principal: DEBRA RUDOLPH   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Helen M. Marshall 342400010330 K-5 110-08 Northern Blvd 718 505 5110 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 24Q330 718 505 5115 Fax: Debra Rudolph drudolp@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Debra Rudolph Melissa Newman Angelica Hernandez Paulette Martinez SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: FabiolaSantos NA NA NA District Information Geographical District: 24 Superintendent’s Office Address: Madelene Chan Superintendent: 98-50 50th Avenue Corona New York 11368 Mchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 592-3357 Phone Number: 718 592-3770 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North jpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 391-8222 Phone Number: (718) 391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Debra Rudolph Melissa Newman Angelica Hernandez Sabrina Jenkins N/A N/A Paulette Martinez Danielle Clermont FabiolaSantos *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Aura Chen Luz Victoria Correa DanielleDanielson Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to develop 21st century culturally responsive citizens who pursue excellence while making positive contributions to our global community.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 330Q is a new school that opened in 2010 with 220 Kindergarten students to help alleviate over-crowding in District 24. Since 2010, we have grown a grade each year and serve approximately 590 students in Grades K-5 for the 2018-2019 school year. Further, we have a phase-out Gifted and Talented education program in grades 4-5 and will continue to blossom a Spanish Dual Language program that will support approx. 60 students in kindergarten and grade one combined. We have developed a strong partnership with New York Cares to provide services to both students and families on an ongoing basis. For the last two years we also have been a member of their School Success Initiative. Through this partnership we have been able to provide our families with adult learning opportunities and students with numerous trips and cultural experiences. Through the New York Cares partnership we also offer our students Lego-Robotics, computer programming, coding, sketching classes and much more on Saturdays and during after-school hours. One of our newer partnerships is with Maspeth Town Hall, they provide our students with a fee-based after-school program Monday through Friday. During after-school, students receive homework help and participate in enrichment activities such as sports, drama and visual arts. A major strength of PS 330Q is our commitment to involving families in all that we do. This has helped our school promote strong family-community ties and trust as denoted in our 2017-2018 NYC School Survey results. Our growing arts program is also on of PS 330’s strengths. We currently have a full-time visual arts, music and dance teacher on staff. All of our students receive arts instruction at least three times per week. We also have school-funded arts enrichment opportunities for our students after-school. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. One key challenge has been supporting the English Language literacy development of our students. Approximately, 77% of our students and families speak a language other than English at home. As a result, we have a significant number of students that would benefit from ENL services but do not officially receive them. These children are often described as 'language minority learners' and benefit greatly from similar instructional strategies to enhance their English language skills. Identifying effective professional development opportunities to address this challenge has been a priority for our school. There is a pressing need to provide instruction that not only meets but exceeds standards to promote equal access for all learners while capitalizing on linguistic and cultural diversity. Another key challenge has been to reduce our special education referral rate, which was 3.8% through 6/31/2017 with 40.7% (46/113) of our students in self-contained classes. Further, adapting, as appropriate, the content, methodology or delivery of instruction to address the unique needs of this sub-population as the primary line of defense and response. Provide flexible programming opportunities using the full continuum of special education services to meet each student’s needs in the least restrictive environment appropriate. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  The element of the Framework for Great Schools that our school has made the most progress is in Collaborative Teachers. We successfully nurtured the professional growth of teachers and staff during the 2017-2018 school year through the institution of grade leaders and organized a professional development committee to help us understand what our priority needs were. One key area of focus for this upcoming school year will be Supportive Environment, specifically to provide our learners a variety of social-emotional learning opportunities and another will be Effective School Leadership, specifically to decrease the number of special education referrals. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q330 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 590 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 46 46 31 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 10 31 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 89.5% % Reduced Lunch 27.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 85.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.09 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 39.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 88% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 63 63 31 94.1% 4.2% 20.0% 3.6% 9.0% 0.7% 4 0% 5.4 34.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO NO N/A YES N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At PS 330Q, our students are continuing to make reading progress as evidenced by a 3.8% percent growth in reading on the 2017 NYS ELA exam. For the 2017-2018 school year 31.5% of our students in grades 3-5 achieved a Level 3/4 on the New York State Common Core Aligned Reading Assessments. According to the 2018 NYC Survey results, 97% of the teachers say they have the resources to promote the Common Core Shifts in Literacy as a result of a new literacy curriculum that was launched last year (2016-201`7) in grades K-2 and this year (2017-2018) in grades 3-5 to promote coherence across all grades. The priority need from the 2018 NYC Survey indicates that only 26% of our teachers say that students use data or text references to support their ideas. Further, the school's June 2018 instructional report for grades 3 & 4 ELA indicated that we were below the city average based on raw scores for the Writing to Sources component of the exam. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of all students in grades 2-5 will move up one level in Trait 3 (Command of Evidence) using the NYC ELA Performance Task rubric in order to improve their ability to provide clear reasons and relevant information from texts when writing from sources. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implement the Writing Process with an emphasis on revision in order to support student thinking and encourage improvement All Students (K-5) September 2018-June 2019 Administrators and Curriculum Coaches All students (K-5) September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Teacher Leaders, and Teachers Implement a three-day structure for answering text-dependent questions to help students use relevant evidence when supporting their own points in writing. (Unpack the question/Finding the Evidence/Explanation) Devise a plan to teach the rubric for scoring, and norm, or align the way our school scores student work using the NYC BOY/EOY Performance Tasks rubric, specifically Trait 3 (Command of Evidence) to measure progress across the year. All teachers All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administrators and Teacher Leaders 4 Embed professional development sessions during cycles of teacher team work that will target looking at student writing in order to unpack student learning and thinking and inform teacher next steps. Provide targeted RTI services to students on each grade using screening data to support the decision making process Lowest 1/3 (Grades 2-5) September 2018-June 2019 Teacher Leaders, RTI teachers, and Data Specialist Organize parent workshops/parent engagement opportunities so they can explore and learn strategies they can use at home to support their child's academic progress. Parents September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator Classroom Teachers, Teacher Leaders, and Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction by conducting parent workshops to empower families and build students’ support systems. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Reading Street Instructional Consultant Teacher Leaders (Peer Collaborative Teachers) Reading Street Curriculum resources Intervention Support Staff (RTI/IEP Teacher) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 5  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our progress towards meeting this goal will be monitored and analyzed during the month of February 2019 (Mid-of-Year) to inform our action plan. As of February 2019, 44% of all students in grades 2-5 have made growth (0.5 or higher) in Trait 3 (Command of Evidence) using the NYC ELA Performance Task rubric. We are one percent below our mid-point benchmark (45%) towards meeting our goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Design three on-demand Writing to Sources tasks (Baseline/Mid-of-Year/End-of-Year) and use the NYC BOY/EOY Performance Tasks rubric, specifically Trait 3 (Command of Evidence) to measure progress across the year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to our 2017-2018 NYC School Survey results, our school's strength is that 91% of teachers say that the adults at our school help students develop the skills they need to complete challenging coursework despite obstacles. The priority need from the 2017-2018 NYC Survey is that only 58% of teachers say that our school recognizes disruptive behavior as social emotional learning opportunities and 63% of teachers say that they teach students the skills needed to regulate their behavior. Further, our OORS data indicates that 70% of our Level 1-5 incidents take place in the classroom. Our plan is to collaboratively create Tier I and Tier II structures within classrooms to support student success and character development and integrate our BEST values into our school-wide and classroom systems. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 22% increase (From 58% to 80%) in the number of adults that will say that our school recognizes disruptive behaviors as social-emotional learning opportunities as shown in the NYC School Survey. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration, Classroom teachers Administration Guidance Counselor Culture Committee Administration Guidance Counselor Culture Committee Classroom Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers will collaboratively create Tier I and Tier II structures in their classroom to support student success and character development. Students PS 330 habits and BEST values will be integrated into school-wide and classroom systems Students Create systems for celebrating/recognizing PS 330 BEST values. Students To benefit all students, daily community meetings will be held during Period 0 (homeroom) in order to integrate BEST values into the classroom environment. Students Create roles and responsibilities for our 330 ambassadors to help students take responsibility for their learning and their experiences. Students September 2018-June 2019 Guidance Counselor Student Government Liaison 8  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Create purposeful opportunities to reference BEST values during workshops with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Create visual spaces to message our BEST values Funding for BEST values celebrations Organize 330 ambassadors Monthly culture committee meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 65% of all teachers will say that our school recognizes disruptive behaviors as social-emotional learning opportunities as evidenced in a school-created survey. We are on track to meeting this goal (67%). As of December 2018, we have new school values (Respect, Responsibility, Collaboration, and Compassion) and conduct monthly community meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A school-created survey will allow us to assess progress towards meeting this specified goal. 9  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school's strength relative to this Framework element was the quality of professional development. For example, 79% of the teacher felt that their professional development experiences during this school year had been sustained and coherently focused, rather than short termed and unrelated as measured by the 2017--2018 NYC Survey results. The priority need that will be addressed in this goal targets Peer Collaboration with only 82% of teachers saying that they design lessons and units together and 59% of teachers saying that they coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of teachers will see an increase (at least .25 or more) in their practice, (particularly to support their personal instructional focus (one MOTP component) as shared with administration during their September 2018 Initial Conference to augment teacher agency when it comes to their own professional learning. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Conduct Initial conferences and have teachers name their personal instructional focus (one MOTP component) Administration September 2018 Administration Conduct midyear conferences to monitor progress as part of the post feedback session during Cycle 2 of observations, to be conducted during the months of (Dec/Jan.) January 2019 December2018- January 2019 Administration Administrators will meet with teachers during post observation conferences and provide them with targeted feedback and resources to support their personal instructional focus. Administration September 2018-June 2019 Administration Create a progress monitoring tool for teachers to utilize to support their growth in terms of their personal professional focus. Teachers Parent meetings will keep parents informed on the progress of our school goals, mandated requirements and new school initiatives. Parents September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administration Administration, Parents Association, SLT members, Parent Coordinator Principal Talk and Learn sessions for parents will include spotlighting teachers who promote reflective practice. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers during a workshop series (8 sessions) entitled Principal Talk and Learn. Instruction/school structures will be a monthly agenda item to spotlight teacher development or continuing professional development. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher Leaders - Peer Collaborative and Model Teachers Showcase visits/in house professional development learning opportunities to support their personal instructional focus. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, the progress monitoring tool that is created will indicate teacher progress and will be discussed at the observation feedback session during Cycle 2 of observations, which will be conducted during the months of December 2018-January 2019. By February 2019, 65% of teachers will see an increase (at least .25 in more) in their practice, particularly to support their personal instructional focus (one MOTP component). As of February 2019, 69% of the teachers have seen and increase in their practice. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In-house self-monitoring tool Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school's strengths in this Framework element for the 2017-2018 school year is Instructional Leadership. 91% overall positive responses in terms of the teachers saying that leadership understands how children learn, tracks student progress, and knows what is going on in the classroom. The priority need that will be addressed is grounded in school specific special education data from the QFSC. The school's referral rate through 6/31/2017 was 3.8% and 40.7% (46/113) of students as of July 2017 are in self-contained classes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019. there will be a decrease in the number of referrals from 3.8% (22/581) to 3% (18/588) for the 2018-2019 school year. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Create a year one mission and action-plan goals to support an RTI framework across both general and special education settings to ensure the learning needs of all students are being met. Create an RTI Team (administration, staff with intervention expertise, support staff, etc... to build buy in, analyze student data and to monitor movement from one tier to another. Choose and utilize a universal screening tool for students in grades K-2 to identify at-risk students in reading that will receive Tier II and Tier III RTI. Determine which students are at risk of poor learning outcomes and implement Tier II or Tier III intervention based on the screening tool selected and the data noticings. Regular progress monitoring to determine if students are making the expected progress as a result of instruction or intervention. Administration RTI providers Teachers September 2018 Teachers K-2 students September2018 Administration -June 2019 Teachers Data Specialist Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration RTI Providers Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration RTI Providers 5  Continuous coaching of effective researched based RTI practices and performance feedback about RTI practices from teacher leaders and administration to further promote improved teacher practice and student outcomes Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration and Teacher Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school administrative team will engage families and support their understanding of this Effective School Leadership goal by developing a communication plan to spell out how parents will learn about their child's successes, challenges, and potential solutions related to RTI. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Implementation of an RTI Team and monthly meetings Select a screening tool to use with RTI implementation and that best meets our students needs in K-2. Closely monitor the progress of students in Tiers II and III Reading Street Literacy Consultant and IEP teacher who will be conducting in-house pd sessions to coach our RTI providers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 6  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, referral data will indicate that 2.6% (15/588) of our students will have been recommended for an initial evaluation. As of February 2019, our referral data is 1.6% (9/565). . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be initial referral data that is collected and analyzed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school's strengths related to this Framework element according to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey is that on average 95% of the parents provided positive responses under the Outreach to Parent header. For example, families say that school staff regularly communicate with them and in a language they understand. The priority need that will address this goal is only 89% of teachers say that families are offered opportunities to visit their child's classroom to observe instruction or participate in a learning activity with their child and 93% of families say that they have attended a general meeting or school event. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will be hosting one Family Open House session per marking period to afford families opportunities to observe instruction or participate in a learning activity. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Utilize Principal Talk and Learn sessions with parents to reinforce the purpose of these Family Open Houses once per marking period. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Families September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator PTA, Administration Conduct three Family Open Houses (Oct/Jan./April) and align these sessions to our instructional priorities for the 2018-2019 school year. Students and Families September 2018 -June 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administrators Teachers, Students, Parent Coordinator, Administrators Parent Workshops conducted by the Parent Coordinator will align to the Common Core Learning Standards and the school's instructional priorities in order to empower families with at-home strategies. All families Collect and monitor attendance at Family Open House sessions. All families September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, PTA, Administration Administration Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 9  Starting in September 2017, our school began to partner with Maspeth Town Hall. Further, we will continue to partner with New York Cares. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal Talk and Learn monthly sessions Parent Coordinator sponsored events Family Open Houses once (1x) per marking period that align to our instructional needs Website re-design to highlight school sponsored events Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. This goal will be monitored in February 2019. By February 2019, 100% of teachers will have hosted two Family Friday sessions to afford families opportunities to observe instruction or participate in a learning activity. We are on track with meeting this goal. Two family open houses have been held, one to support our writing focus and the other to support social emotional wellness. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Sign-in Sheets from these school-sponsored Family Open Houses Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Running Records Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Guided Reading Small group NYS ELA Exam Results Strategy Groups One to One Fundations Tutoring BOY Performance Tasks Lexia Software Tier I Progress Results When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the School Day After School Before School Saturday Program Leveled Reading Intervention Shared Reading Read-Alouds Independent Reading 1  Mathematics During the School Day After School Before School Saturday Program NYS Math Exam Results Go Math! RTI Small group resources (Reteach) One to One Go Math BOY, MOY, Assessment Results Hands-on Approach to support math learning BOY Performance Tasks Tutoring Tier I Progress Results Math manipulatives Math Stations After-school Math Program SETSS Science Grade 4 Science Exam results Hands-on science experiments Small group During the School Day Tier I Progress Results Science intervention kit Social Studies On Demand Writing Assessments Tier I Progress Results Guided Reading Small group Passport to Social Studies During the School Day 2  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Staff and or family referrals to Guidance Counselor for support Beautiful Me Small Group Anxiety Management One to One Character Education workbooks During the School Day 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have 105 students in Temporary Housing that are currently attending our school. This information was obtained from a data report that was generated from ATS. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. In order to ensure that our STH students have opportunities to progress academically, we provide them with basic emergency supplies (e.g. uniform attire, supplies, books, etc..) We also cover all trip costs when these students attend school trips and provide other educational services, too (e.g. counseling services, intervention programs). Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS N/A 4 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. To attract Highly Qualified Teachers we post our staff vacancies on our school website and forward them to colleagues that know our school mission and understand our school community. We provide new teachers mentoring through the formal mentoring program and a buddy teacher, respectively. Our veteran staff members are selected and assigned based on their instructional strengths and past performance. To ensure retention and support for our highly qualified teachers, our school promotes the teacher leadership initiatives sponsored by UFT. For the 2018-2019, our school will have three Peer Collaborative Teachers in conjunction with the support of our Literacy Consultant from Pearson. Further, we hire teachers who are certified and licensed in their respective subject area and seek out teachers who have dual/triple certification. A hiring committee is also organized annually to help administration conduct interviews, assess writing samples, and observe demonstration lessons in order to attract highly-qualified teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 6  Our Professional Development committee is comprised of administration, teacher leaders, and grade team leaders that plan and arrange differentiated professional development opportunities for staff based on student performance outcomes, teacher observation feedback and teacher need as determined by individual teachers. Our Borough Field Support Center provides professional development opportunities for administration, teachers and paras throughout the year. Teachers conduct inter-visitations to learn new ideas and strategies. All new teachers are mentored by experienced, tenured teachers. New hires meet with administration regularly as an additional layer of support. Three Peer Collaborative Teachers were staffed this year to promote teacher leadership from within. A weekly planning prep with grade-level colleagues was built into the master schedule to support coherence and the analysis of student work. Training is scheduled for administration to support teacher development. Paraprofessionals are scheduled for professional development sessions that target social/emotional development and academic progress. Data Specialist supports teachers with tools and resources to help them analyze data and monitor student progress. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 7  Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). To help preschool children transition to elementary school we have partnered with local preschools to speak with families about the academic expectations of elementary schools, share records, provide PD opportunities to their teachers at our school. We also host open house sessions for the families of incoming students. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We will meet twice per year (October and May) with our Assessment Committee that is comprised of our UFT Chapter Chairperson, Principal, and grade leaders/teacher representative from each grade. During these meetings we will discuss our current assessments and student outcomes and revise as appropriate. We will use the May meeting to plan our assessment cycles for the upcoming school year and use the collected feedback when planning for professional development opportunities and for determining best practices for assessment measures. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are 8 consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A Pt A, B; 5C A,B; 5E A, B 5A Pt A, B; 5C A,B; 5E A, B 5A Pt A, B; 5C A,B; 5E A, B Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 396,474.00 Title II, Part A Federal 0 Title III, Part A Federal 19,668.00 Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 4,089,772.00 X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 9   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 330, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 330 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 1  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 330, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 3  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 4  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 5  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 6  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our Title III funds for the 2018-2019 school year will be used to support an After School program that will focus on raising the reading levels of struggling ELL readers in grades three through five.Students will practice reading strategies by being actively engaged in literacy centers. Types of literacy centers will consist of a fluency center, questioning center, context clue center, and a guided reading center. These literacy centers will be differentiated learning activities that students complete in small groups in order to move toward their literacy goals. Varying materials will be used such as sets of guided reading books, graphic organizers, audio books, picture cards to increase vocabulary, cloze reading passages, and questions and answer cards. Teachers will use F & P assessment data in September to match each student with a literacy center that meets their needs. This in turn will make a positive growth on the reading portion of the NYSESLAT exam and F+P levels. ELL students will be grouped heterogeneously in order for there to be language models in each group. This program will give students the opportunity to develop reading comprehension strategies. Our school wide data shows that ELLs need improvement in English Language Arts, specifically reading comprehension and response to literature, based on the state ELA exam. NYSESLAT trends also show that students struggle with reading comprehension. While many ELL students are able to decode grade level books, they have trouble comprehending complex story plots and grasping the gist. This program aims to target reading comprehension strategies that students will be able to apply throughout the school day. In addition, research shows that increasing reading comprehension leads to higher reading levels and proficiency, in turn increasing gains on the NYSESLAT exam. At the end of the program, students will showcase their new understanding pertaining to a specific center. They will discuss why it is important to succeed in any one particular strategy. This program will also use technology to support computer literacy using Lexia. Teachers will also demonstrate how to use the Lexia program, and monitor their usage. Technology is heavily integrated into this program to engage and motivate students in the reading process. This program will target 30 ELL students in grades three through five. The program will meet once a week on Thursday from 2:30-4:30p.m. The Fall program will begin on October 18th and end on December 20th. . The program will meet in classrooms where there is access to a Smart Board and laptops. Program instruction will be in English, however native language support will be used when appropriate. Our subgroup will be Expanding ELLs who are several levels below grade level standards. Students will be grouped according to their reading levels to promote improvement in fluency. The program will be run by three ENL certified teachers. The third teacher will facilitate parent workshops to help meet the needs of students at home. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration 9  Part C: Professional Development topics to be covered   name of provider Begin description here: The ENL teachers will host professional development sessions for all staff. These sessions will focus on best practices for ELLs as well as the ELL identification process. Attendance will be collected by the teacher facilitating the experience. Our parent coordinator will serve as the primary liason for increasing parent participation. Topic 1: Making Reading Street Content Comprehensible/Creating Scaffolds for NewcomersRationale: ELL students are struggling with the content rich curriculum. Moreover we have 3 new comers joining our community which creates the need to provide extra support for their entry into 4th and 5th grade. Moreover, we noticed little progress in reading street unit data accross the year. For this reason we wanted to ensure that our community received the necessary strategies and skills to support our students moving forward.Date: Week of September 24thTime: During Volunteer coachingName of Provider: _____________________Audience: 3rd 4th, and 5th Grade Teachers Topic 2: Preparing ELL students for the NYSESLATRationale: There are many ways classroom teachers can integrate NYSESLAT practice into their lessons to better prepare students for the exam. We observed decreases in some of our lower grades for the NYSESLAT and so we believe more opportunities for students to practice their speaking and listening skills in class will not only help them on the NYSESLAT but it will also help them access the curriculum.Date: March 19, 2019Time: 2:30-3:40Name of Provider: Sean Ali and Melissa NewmanAudience: All teachers The ENL teachers will also host a study group that meets the first Tuesday month. The group will use the text Reading With Power and Passion by CIPL Professional Learning Series. Studying this text and reviewing best practices will enable classroom teachers to grow in their practice with independent reading and assisting(IR) English Language Learners during IR. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: A teacher will host a Saturday Academy program in which parents of ELLS can attend several workshop series' on a variety of topics. The meetings will inform parents on how best to support their child's literacy skills and English language development. The teachers will model strategies parents can use at home in their native language. The teacher will also introduce learning tools that parents can use at home to support their child's English Language Development. These meetings will target the families of children enrolled in the Title III Saturday Program, as well as additional parents of ELLs who are looking to help their children advance academically. One certified teacher (and an interpreter if necessary) will conduct each workshop. There will be approx. nine one hour sessions.. Bilingual materials such as strategy summaries and bilingual content glossaries will be distributed at these meetings. Refreshments will be served.Parents will be notified via a flyer in their native language sent home with students in order to sign up for 0  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities these series workshops. At the workshops, parents will be asked to sign an attendance sheet. Parents will receive an agenda for each workshop in their language. Invitations, attendance sheets and copies of the agendas will be kept in the ELL compliance binder. Parents will also be encouraged to attend the Title III reading program to see the progress their children have made. The students will have a chance to read in front of the class to demonstrate their reading progress. These programs are developed based on the needs of students as indicated by reading level data and NYSELAT data. Students need continued support with reading at home in order to be successful in class. Moreover, our parent coordinator gathered feedback during end of year PTA meeting last year and parents maintained interest in being more prepared to support students at home as readers and also in their preparation for the NYSESLAT Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. These funds are allocated for the purpose of paying for teachers to plan for and facilitate the intervention and support for families and students Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 12795.60  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2132.6 2132.6 4265.2 2785 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name PS330 Borough Queens School Number 330 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Debra Rudolph Coach Stephanie Rosario ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Danielle Russo Teacher/Subject Area Michelle Zytko Teacher/Subject Area Cristina Edwards Related-Service Provider Jaclyn Vives Superintendent Madelene Chan Assistant Principal Matthew Brownstein Coach Jessie Winston School Counselor Stephanie Villafuerte Parent Digna Malla Parent Coordinator Sulay Tapia Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 6f 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 581 2 Total number of ELLs 166 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 28.57%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Lang. Spanish 2017-2018 Program TBE TBE TBE DL K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 Tot # 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 330Q uses Fountas and Pinnell (F & P) along with Reading Street (K-2) and Expeditionary Learning (3-5) to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. The data provides us with insights about ELL students' letter and sound recognition, early literacy behaviors as well as their reading levels. Writing assessments are part of Reading Street unit assessments for grades K-2. For grades 3-5 Ready Writing was adapted during the school year. After the units, teachers administer on-demand writing tasks to determine student progress. Results from the on-demand writing assessments show students are progressing but still need to work on sentence structure and organizational skill. F & P assessments are administered three times a year to measure progress. Many ELLs enter the year below grade level, however they make strides to approach or meet grade level benchmarks. This data is used to form homogeneous reading groups, refer students to RTI and guide instruction. For students who do not read in English, teachers use the results of the Spanish LAB to assess prior knowledge and home language literacy 3  skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Following formative assessments, the data is calculated and shared with the staff from the coaches. ENL teachers gather the data and form homogeneous groups according to proficiency level and/or reading level to develop lessons that focus on areas of need and develop rigorous instruction for those who performed well on these assessments. Some ELLs whose data is far below grade level receive RTI services. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After analyzing the data, ENL teacher create, differentiate, and implement lessons that focus on those areas of need. To see if ELLs are meeting these areas, additional assessments are administered. When using the EDAT tool, we form ELL inquiry groups and focus on an area or skill we feel they need more focus on to perform better on assessments, the NYSESLAT, and ELA/Math state exams. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] During the grade team meetings, inquiry meetings and Data days, teachers work collaboratively to analyze data in order to provide the students with the best instructional practices. The RTI framework is used to guide teachers in their instructional decisions and also to group students according to their strengths and weaknesses. Special attention is given to ELLs and SWD students that are grouped in Tiers as to receive scaffolded, modified and differentiated instruction. Progress was monitered using F&P, midyear benchmarking, Reading Street end of unit assessments, Expeditionl Learning mid unit and end of unit assessments. Data was tracked using Mastery Connect and school-wide spreadsheets that track and monitor student data. We also used EDAT to track student progress in the four modalities. As a result of RTI services, few students are referred for Special Education services. Data days gave us opportunities to improve the group work the students were assigned to. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. This school year we used the EDAT tool to evaluate the effectiveness of our ELL program. We noticed that after analyzing the data, the speaking modality was the strongest skill throughout all grades. Listening was the next commanding skill. We noticed that the reading and writing modalities were not so strong. We used the ELA state exam results to determine the effectiveness of the program as well. We used the EDAT tool to evaluate the effectiveness of our Title III program by examining their progress on NYSESLAT, and we used the at-risk levels to form subgroups to create ongoing inquiry cycles. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? During our inquiry group meetings with classroom teachers, the ENL teachers shared their results with classroom teachers. Then we discussed and planned how to maintain students' performance in the skills they excelled in. We also discussed and planned how classroom teachers can improve students' performance in the skills needed. As push-in ENL teachers, we co-teach effective lessons by mapping out which teacher is going to implement data findings during the lessons taught. Since they do well in speaking and listening, lessons are student led. Since most ELLs need more concentration in reading and writing, there is a lot of modeling from the classroom teacher and the push-in ENL teacher. During ENL inquiry meetings, again the data is analyzed. We discuss and implement how we can improve reading and writing skills. Since part of our ELL population requires a pull-out model, we put much focus on these skills. We implement lessons to improve student performance. We also use academic language similar to the NYSESLAT and ELA so students become familiar with the terminology. 4  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for ELLs is delivered in the Stand Alone ENL and Integrated ENL models. For Stand Alone ENL, students who are Entering and Emerging are pulled from their classroom into the ENL classroom for instruction for four 45- minute periods per week, totaling to 180 minutes per week.. ENL teachers work closely with the classroom teachers to ensure that units are aligned. The language of instruction used in this model is English with some supports in the home language. Schedules are created to avoid conflict with ELA and math instruction. In the Integrated ENL model, the ENL teacher enters the classroom and co-teaches with the classroom teacher for four 45-miute periods per week, totaling to 180 minutes per week. The Integrated ENL model services Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding. The ENL teacher creates supplemental materials to aid comprehension in the content areas. As per CR Part 154.2, Entering and Emerging ELL students receive one unit of Stand-Alone ENL per week along with one unit of Integrated ENL. Transitioning and Expanding ELLs receive one unit of Integrated ENL per week. Commanding ELLs will continue to receive .5 units a week of Integrated ENL for two years. Their service is two 45-minute periods, totaling to 90 minutes per week. In the Stand-Alone ENL model, students are grouped heterogeneously among Entering and Emerging ELLs. ENL teachers design language rich content area units that are aligned with the Common Core standards. These lessons are designed with multiple entry points to increase participation by all students. In the Integrated ENL model, students are grouped heterogeneously. The ENL teacher will push-in to the classroom and work with all of the ELLs regardless of proficiency level. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. New to PS 330Q during the 2017-2018 school year, there will be a Dual Language Program in kindergarten. Services will be provided to ELLs by the classroom teacher who will be certified in Common Branches and hold a Bilingual Extension certificate. Our Dual Language program is delivered by a certified dual language teacher who alternates between spanish on one day and English on the following day. Vocabulary, books, learning targets, and all supporting language materials are separated by color based on their language. Students are grouped together heterogeneously based on literacy skills based on their F+ P levels and homogeneously based on interests and learning styles. This data is gathered based on student inventory survey conducted at the beginning oft he year. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 5  With regards to the Freestanding ENL program, as per CR Part 154, Entering ELLs will receive 2 units of ENL study per week. One unit will be delivered as Stand-Alone ENL, and one unit is delivered in the Integrated ENL model. Emerging students will also receive two units of ENL study per week. A half unit will be delivered as Stand-Alone, one unit as Integrated ENL and a half unit of either depending on scheduling. Transitioning ELLs will receive one unit of ENL study per week. A half unit will be delivered as Integrated ENL and a half unit will be Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL as the schedule allows. Expanding ELLs will receive one unit of study as Integrated ENL per week. Commanding ELLs will receive .5 units of Integrated ENL for two years. With regards to the Dual Language program, as per CR Part 154, Entering ELLs will receive 2 units of ENL study per week. Emerging students will also receive two units of ENL study per week. Transitioning ELLs will receive one unit of ENL study per week. Expanding ELLs will receive one unit of study as Integrated ENL study per week. Services in the Dual Language program will by provided to the ELLs by a teacher who will be certified in Common Branches and hold a Bilingual Extension certificate. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In both stand alone and integrated models, the language of instruction is English. In the Dual Language program, English and Spanish are used in alternating days. Our instructional approach relies on incorporating ENL methodologies, along with scaffolding instructional strategies. During ELA both science and social studies content is incorporated. ENL teachers use curriculum based materials aligned to the content topic. Teachers use science and social studies websites to implement topics, trade books, science books from Harcourt and social studies textbooks from Houghton Mifflin. During instruction an important emphasis is placed on tier II vocabulary acquisition. ENL teachers expose students to new vocabulary by using images, activating background knowledge about the specific content topic and defining new content vocabulary. Content vocabulary charts, bilingual glossaries, dictionaries and picture cards together with online sources are tools used to scaffold the language acquisition process. Furthermore, ENL teachers engage students in experiential learning and hands-on activities so that the acquisition and understanding of new concepts are successful. Students are expected to apply new learnings in academically rigorous and meaningful activities which are always aligned with Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish speaking ELLs receive the Spanish LAB-R when first admitted. This provides us with how literate and fluent they are in their first language. During the school year, ELLs are assessed in their L1 in math, especially while taking the beginning of the year and end of the year math MOSL. During the Math State Exam, students are provided dictionaries that are translated in their first language along with a copy of the test in their first language. Students are told that they need to make a choice as to which math booklet they prefer to write in. The 4th grade state science exam is administered in their first language as well. For the hands-on performance task, practicum, it is verbally translated for the students. For the written portion, the students are given a booklet in their first language also. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. Our schools does not have any SIFE students at this time. Nevertheless, in the event that such students are registered, the school ensures that these students would be given the NYSITELL, oral interview questionnaire and the Multilingual Literacy SIFE Screener (MLS). Once the student is tested, he/she is placed in the appropriate grade level. If the student is at the Entering or Emerging level, they would start with the On Our Way to English curriculum. The focal point of our CCLS-aligned instruction is to foster students' reading and writing skills while simultaneously developing oral language skills. Students engage in small group guided reading and writing groups which gives them the opportunity to continue developing oracy skills. The ENL and classroom teachers would meet regularly to ensure that instructional practices, scaffolds and differentiated instruction are tailored to the students' needs and learning style. 6  B. The ENL Push-In teachers works collaboratively with the classroom teachers to develop supports for Newcomer ELLs in their classrooms. Teachers collaborate so that lesson plans are aligned with Common Core Learning Standards and the New Language Arts Progressions. ENL teachers are members of their respective grade teams which meet once a week to analyze and discuss students' data to create academically rigorous instruction that will provide newcomers with opportunities for spoken participation. ENL teachers differentiate and scaffold units of study in reading, writing, math, science, and social studies. For our newcomer students, we get to know the students better by knowing their learning styles and provide them with teaching and student-led activities that address their individual language needs. On Our Way to English, Fundations, Reading Street, and Ready Writing are currently being used to support language development in academic content. Guided reading books from Rigby and Scholastic are being utilized to target specific literacy skills in small group instruction that supports English literacy for our Newcomer ELLs. Other programs used at our school to support ELLs in their various stages of language development are: Leveled Literacy Intervention through Fountas and Pinnell, Go Math, Science by Harcourt School Publishers, as well as Social Studies by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. Newcomer ELLs are also invited to participate in our Title III after school program which focuses on oral language and literacy skills through the use of technology and reader's theatre. When newcomer ELLs (0-3 years) take classroom assessments, testing accommodations are taken into consideration. As a team we agree to allow the ELLs to have time and a half to take the assessments. Since students with1-3 years are required to take a state exam, they are grouped with other ELLs in the same grade and are given time and a half to complete the exam. Testing accommodations for ELL-SWD's are aligned to what is mandated by their IEPs. C. In addition to B. above, when dealing with ELLs who received services 4-6 years, ENL teachers analyze NYSESLAT results for the past 3 years in order to identify the modality that presents the area of challenge. ENL instruction, materials, and scaffolds are planned strategically and they are always aligned with CCLS and the NYS New Language Arts Progressions. Particular attention is paid to tier II vocabulary acquisition in order to differentiate instruction to meet students' academic needs. When meeting with small groups, students are mixed with English proficient students in order to expose them to native language models. Developing ELLs are invited to participate in the Title III after school program to foster continued language enrichment through interactive activities and use of technology. When ELLs with 4-6 years take classroom assessments, testing accommodations are considered. As a team we also agree to allow the ELLs to have time and a half to take the assessments. Since ELLs with 4-6 years are required to take a state exam, they are grouped with other ELLs in the same grade and are given time and a half to complete the exam. Testing accommodations for ELL-SWD's are aligned to what is indicated on their IEPs. If their IEP states they need to be in a separated location in a group of no more than 5, they are in that setting. If the IEP states that they need to be tested in a separate location, they are tested in a separate location. D. For the 2017-2018 school year, we only have one student who is a long term ELL. This student receives Integrated ENL services. Furthermore, as an SWD, he recieves all services, scaffolds, and differentiation that are mandated by his IEP.Supplemental ELL materials from the Reading Street curriculum are used to differentiate and scaffold instruction in ELA, whereas a variety of scaffolding, such as visual scaffolds and manipulatives, are used for instructions in math. E. Former ELLs will continue to receive .5 units of Integrated ENL instruction per week. These students are identified as Commanding ELLs, and they receive two 45-minute periods of Integrated ENL instruction per week, totaling to 90 minutes per week. During this time, the ENL teacher will support them in their classroom in the content areas. Regular conferencing with these students provide them with actionable feedback. ENL teachers continue to integrate ENL methodology and scaffolds to further support these students. These students are also invited to participate in the Title III after school program. As far as testing accommodations are concerned for former ELLs, they will also receive time and a half on classroom assessments and state assessments for 2 consecutive years. For former ELL-SWD's, what is indicated on their IEP testing accommodations will be followed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs identified as having special needs receive additional differentiated instruction and ELL scaffolding techniques that are needed as per each student’s IEP. Materials used to support language development for ELL-SWDs are Reading Street Grades K-5, On Our Way to English by Ribgy, Fundations, and Ready Writing. These materials are then modified to meet students' individual needs. Reading Street provides classroom teachers multiple supplemental ELL materials, such as retelling cards, ELL 7  poster talks, leveled English Language Devlopment and English Language Learners grade appropriate leveled readers, and bilingual summaries of main text selections. the On Our Way to English curriculum provides visual reading strategy cards, guided reading books, academic language posters, and visually scaffolded vocabulary cards. Fundations provides students with alphabet cards with pictures to support phonemic awareness and sound-to-letter recognition. Ready Writing provides scripted lessons to address needs for text-based writing. Guided reading books from Rigby and Scholastic are being utilized to target specific literacy skills in small group instruction. These books are used to help students gain access to academic content while simultaneously accelerating their English language development by asking and answering questions and having small group discussions. Other programs used at our school to support ELLs and ELL-SWDs in their various stages of language development are: Leveled Literacy Intervention through Fountas and Pinnell, Go Math, Science by Harcourt School Publishers, as well as Social Studies by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. A greater emphasis is placed on developing academic language and literacy skills by creating multiple opportunities for practice in each lesson, as well as small group instruction to meet students' needs. For all ELLs, teachers make use of sentence starters for speaking and writing and are used to accelerate English language development. ELL-SWD students also have personal word walls attached to their folders for each content area. Technology is used to support students' language acquisition. Teachers use Smartboards and Promethean Boards to scaffold all lessons by showing videos (Reading Street academic language videos and concept videos), enlarging images, and projecting charts and graphic organizers. The website Reading A-Z, that is affiliated with RAZ-Kids, is used during shared reading lessons and centers. The books are leveled on this website and are used for guided reading as well. We also use Lexia, an online guided reading lesson program, that establishes a student's reading level through a preassessment and then develops their reading skills trough interactive activites. The interactive nature of the program is particularly beneficial for ELLs and SWDs who require a variety of entry points for learning. The school subscribes to BrainPOP so teachers can show content-based videos related to classroom topics while making academic language more accessible for ELL-SWDs. I-Ready is a website that has content lessons, videos, and interactive activities that are individually designed based on student data. IPads are used during centers for students to read and listen to books read aloud to them. Math apps are downloaded so students can practice skills and enrich themselves. Listening centers are established in all classrooms. Reading A-Z has books in Spanish, which is our dominant language in our school. Using the app RAZ-Kids, students can listen to and read the books in both languages. Teachers use google translate to communicate directions for the students. In math, teachers use the GoMath! website to assist students in their first language during instructional sessions. All the materials and strategies listed above are used by all ELL-SWDs in our school to provide access to academic content and accelerate English language development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? PS 330Q's mission is to provide our ELLs and SWD's with the least restrictive environment. All students spend 24 periods per week in total within their classroom setting. If there is sufficient evidence (psycho-educational testing, teacher reports/observations, local assessments, student work products, parent information/input) SWD's will be placed in an ICT setting. SWD's that approaching grade level standards or that are slightly below in either Math or ELA are usually placed in an ICT setting. These students are capable of academic success in a general education setting with the supports of small group instruction, differentiated curriculum, scaffolds, and/or parallel teaching is implemented as needed or deemed necessary. Moreover, during SIT meetings, we look at student periodic data to determine if students would benifet from receiving less restrictive instruction in a particular subject. For example, we have students in 12-1-1 class, who receive ELA in an ICT setting. Push-in and co-teaching models are predominately used to promote the academic success of our ELL and SWD population. Teachers make use of sentence starters and sentence frames, personal word walls, technology, scaffolds, graphic organizers, and small group instruction, to ensure academic success for ELLs who are also identified as SWD's. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 8  A reading academic intervention program for ELLs is implemented in our school. There is an RTI teacher for grades K-2 and an RTI teacher for grades 3-5. RTI teachers implement Fountas and Pinnell as a base line to collect data and create lessons accordingly. The intervention program used in our school is Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI). LLI is designed to be used with small groups of ELL students who need intensive support to achieve grade-level competency in reading. Targeted instruction includes: combination of reading, writing, and phonics/word study; emphasis on teaching for comprehending strategies; explicit attention to genre and to the features of non-fiction and fiction texts; special attention to disciplinary reading, literature inquiry, and writing about reading; specific work on sounds, letters, and words in activities designed to help students notice the details of written language and learn how words "work"; close reading to deepen and expand comprehension; explicit teaching of effective and efficient strategies for expanding vocabulary; explicit teaching for fluent and phrased reading. We have also added a math specialist to deliver RTI services for grades 1-5. Small group instruction provided by the classroom teacher is used to as an intervention to support ELLs in math. The RTI teachers service the bottom third based on assessments and groups are rotated every two months. Data is collected to evaluate the effectiveness of these programs and if further instruction is needed. In addition, there is an after school tutoring program and Saturday academy program open to ELLs who need further support in ELA and math. Currently we do not have an intervention service for both science and social studies. However, for the first time this year, we have a science cluster teacher who implements grade appropriate lessons aligned to the CCLS. The teacher utilizes technology, hands-on materials and scaffolds materials for ELLs and ELL-SWD's. Native language is used in intervention programs when needed. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? During the 2017-2018 school year, an improvement to our curriculum was made to incorporate Ready Writing to address gaps in our writing curriculum. In addition, Reading Street was incorporated for grades K-2. For the upcoming school year, we will continue with the use of Ready Writing as it was seen as an effective means of writing instruction. In addition, based on teacher and student feedback, we ill expand our use of Reading Street to include grades 3-5, in an effort to make ELA instruction consistent across all grades. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? PS 330Q closed our bilingual program during the 2012-2013 school year due to a lack of parent interest in the program. In addition, we found that ELLs enrolled in ENL have been more successful academically. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs, including after school and supplemental services. ELL students in grades 1-5 are invited to participate in the Basic Skills Academy after school program, after school tutoring, the after school music and dance enrichment programs, and Saturday Academy. American Millennium Soccer Club also runs sessions after school several days a week. ELLs in grades two to five are invited to join. There is also a Title III enrichment after school program offered exclusively to ELLs in grades 2-5 that meets twice a week. The program focuses on storytelling using the software GoAnimate. Supplemental services are provided as needed. Our school sends out letters to parents in English, Spanish, and Chinese explaining the programs, when the program meets, the times for the program, and the duration of the program. Parents are asked to sign the tear off portion at the bottom of the sheet giving their child permission to participate. ELLs fully participate and are homogeneously and/or heterogeneously grouped according to their needs and type of school program it is. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Materials used to support language development for various ELL subgroups are Reading Street Grades K-5, On Our Way to English by Ribgy, Fundations, and Ready Writing. These materials are then modified to meet students' individual needs. Reading Street provides classroom teachers multiple supplemental ELL materials, such as retelling cards, ELL poster talks, leveled English Language Devlopment and English Language Learners grade appropriate leveled readers, and bilingual summaries of main text selections. These materials scaffold content and language well for students at the Entering and Emerging level, while the bilingual summaries of the main text selection support ELLs who are literate in their home language. The On Our Way to English curriculum provides visual reading strategy cards, guided reading books, academic language posters, and visually scaffolded vocabulary cards. The materials provide support for ELLs ranging from Entering to Expanding while also assisting ELLs who have IEPs. Fundations provides students with alphabet cards with pictures to support phonemic 9  awareness and sound-to-letter recognition. These are particularly useful to ELLs in the lower grades who are learning the basics of reading and can also support older ELLs who are new to the English phonetic system. Ready Writing provides scripted lessons to address needs for text-based writing, which particularly targets their developmental strengths of Transitioning and Expanding ELLs. Guided reading books from Rigby and Scholastic are being utilized to target specific literacy skills in small group instruction. These books are helpful for ELLs Entering and Emerging ELLs who are newer to the language, as well as to ELLs with advanced oral language skills but struggle with reading and literacy. For all ELL subgroups, teachers make use of sentence starters for speaking and writing and are used to accelerate English language development. ELL-SWD students also have personal word walls attached to their folders for each content area. Technology is used to support students' language acquisition, with more basic programs used to support Entering and Emerging students and more advanced ones for Transitioning , Expanding, and Commanding. Teachers use Smartboards and Promethean Boards to scaffold all lessons by showing videos (Reading Street academic language videos and concept videos), enlarging images, and projecting charts and graphic organizers. The website Reading A-Z, that is affiliated with RAZ-Kids, is used during shared reading lessons and centers. The books are leveled so that there are variety of lower leveled books suitable to the needs of Entering and Emerging students and books at higher reading levels that are better suited to Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding students. Lexia, an online guided reading lesson program, has proved particularly useful for the subgroup of ELL-SWDs, because it establishes a student's reading level through a preassessment and then develops their reading skills trough interactive activites. The school subscribes to BrainPOP so teachers can show content-based videos related to classroom topics while making academic language more accessible for ELL-SWDs. I-Ready is a website that has content lessons, videos, and interactive activities that are individually designed based on student data, which is beneficial for all ELL subgroups. IPads are used during centers for students to read and listen to books read aloud to them. The ability to integrate technology into learning centers means that multiple centers can be created for individual subgroups. In other words, classrooom teachers and ENL teachers are able to plan one center for Entering/Emerging and another for Transitioning/Expanding. Reading A-Z has books in Spanish and has proved advantageous in planning instruction for the subgroup of ELLs who are literate in their home language. Using the app RAZ-Kids, students can listen to and read the books in both languages. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The native language is supported in the instruction in a number of ways. ENL teachers make use of new language progressions to differentiate instruction and allow Entering and Emerging ELLs to rely on their native language to provide answers and engage in discussion. ENL teachers make use of cognates in instruction to make connections between students' native language and English Language Acquisition. ELLs are encouraged to refer to the picture or gestures so that the rest of the students can interact as well. Often, students with the same native language are placed in same groups so that they can assist each other during the activities. Students are also supported in their native language by making use of dictionaries and glossaries in class and during math assessments. At home, students are encouraged to read books in their native language and engage in conversations about literature with their families. In addition, bilingual paraprofessionals, bilingual teachers and literacy coach provide clarifications for ELLs in their native languages whenever necessary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. PS 330Q ensures that all required services and resources support and correspond to ELLs age and grade levels. ELL students are grouped both homogeneously and heterogeneously on their respective grade levels. ELLs receive integrated ELA instruction in their classrooms using the curriculum Reading Street on their grade level. ENL teachers co-teach to provide scaffolds and supports in this subject area. Stand alone ENL is delivered in grade level appropriate small group sessions by ENL Teacher. ELL-SWD's receive their services according to their IEPS. Services are delivered by classroom teacher. IEP ensures that all special education corresponds to students ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school does not share a building. 0  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). A week before school starts, the principal welcomes families. Families are given a T shirt with school's logo and food is offered as a welcome. This enables parents to ask questions they may have about the school and give parents a chance to know each other and build community. This breakfast also gives new students an opportunity to interact with one another. At the start of the school year, the school counselor introduces herself to all newcomer ELLs and offers support during their transition to school in the United States. She also periodically hosts special breakfasts for these students to build camaraderie over shared experiences. The parent coordinator attends PDs pertaining to ELLs and shares resources with parents. For example, Ms. Tapia informs parents about useful online ENL sources or ENL games that are beneficial for language development. These sources serve as tools parents can use at home to help their children progress academically. In addition, the parent coordinator also hosts several workshops for parents to help newly enrolled ELLs become accustomed to our school community. Such workshops include: Shifting into High Gear 10/3/17, Helping Your Child Learn English, 11/8/17, Helping Your Child Succeed in School 12/5/17, 1/9/18. As for the activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year, depending on their level, we make sure they are engaged in small group activities fostering their early literacy skills, such as phonic activities, guided reading, writing and math as well as content vocabulary activities.s. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Paste response to question here: N/A. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? During the 2017-2018 school year, we will have our first Dual Language program for students entering kindergarten. The model used will be a self-contained. Each core content area will be taught in English and Spanish. English and Spanish will alternate each day, so that students have the opportunity to transfer content knowledge between languages. Content will be reinforced in both languages, and will be separated by language. All content in Spanish will be labeled in red, and all content in English will be depicted in blue. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development plan for the ELL personnel, ENL teachers, common branch teachers, secretary and parent coordinator revolves around the on-going assessments of student needs. Our professional development is geared to provide staff and pedagogues with tools and resources for implementing ENL strategies and methodologies. All school personnel, including the assistant principal, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, speech therapists, occupational/physical therapists and psychologists are included. In addition, all staff are encouraged to apply for ELL PDs offered through the DOE Professional Development website. The ENL team engages in an inquiry cycle over the course of several weeks in which we analyzed data from the EDAT tool in order to identify the modality that was the greatest challenge to students. Then, we used the EDAT tool to target particular groups of students who struggled the most. In our inquiry cycle, we analyzed student work samples after they had been taught research-based writing strategies. For example, some writing strategies that were developed in the PD 1  inquiry cycle were Think Maps and Talk Around the Topic. These strategies provided students with opportunities to use their relatively stronger skill of oral language to bolster their weaker skill of writing. Providing students with opportunities to orally eleaborate on topics increased their ability to write about it. When findings from the work yielded positive results, we continued to use the writing strategies and adapted them to a variety of writing genres. In cases, where they did not demonstrate student progress, then the strategies were modified to increase student academic gains. ENL teachers either personally choose or are guided to attend PDs outside the building that are offered through the office of ELLs. These PDs are aligned to CCLS and pertain to ENL strategies. A number of PDs also relate to the administrative part of an ENL position. For example, a member of the ENL team attended a monthly series held by the Ell services administrator from the Queens North Field Center, which included topics centered around both teaching practices and ENL compliance. At these PDs, ENL teachers interact with other ENL teachers where they exchange successful practices. These practices are turn-keyed to ENL and classroom teachers back at school. PD content revolves around teaching specific skills such as teaching content vocabulary, asking high order thinking questions, information/narrative writing, questioning in non-fiction etc. ENL scaffolds are shared and teachers are given handouts in the form of academic articles or graphic organizers which support the specific ENL method. Also, ENL teachers are exposed to games and software which can be used in small groups or centers and have been used as successful tools for teaching certain content and language aspects. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. On Mondays, on-site professional development is provided to all teachers and administrators. Some of the PDs address the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies (differentiation and scaffolding) and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. At times, an outside Professional Development organization comes in to provide other types of staff development. Before these PDs begin, teachers are asked to sign in for attendance and take an agenda regarding the PD topic. These attendance forms and a copy of the agenda hand-outs are kept in a binder and remain in the coaches’ office. For English as a New Language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent of the required professional development hours is dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. ENL teachers and teachers with ELLs in their classrooms participate at full day off-site Professional Development training facilities, such as The Bureau of Education and Research (BER) and The Department of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS). The principal either designates teachers to participate or encourages teachers to attend these PDs. Teachers submit PD request forms to Ms. Paulina Del Pozo, the secretary, and the principal gives the approval for teachers to attend. These PD request forms are kept on file in a binder. Following these PDs, teachers are asked to complete a PD reflection form indicating new insights gained and when they would like to turnkey the information. 2  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teachers utilize the allotted forty-minute weekly parent engagement block to schedule progress meetings with parents. In these sessions, the ENL teachers discuss language development progress, assessment results and language and academic needs in the content areas. Teachers also provide strategies and resources for parents to use with their child at home. In house interpreters are present at these meetings as needed. If there is no interpreter available, the ENL teachers use the DOE provided phone interpretation service. Additionally, when individual meetings are scheduled between parents and the classroom teachers, the ENL teacher will attend to provide updates on language development progress. ENL teachers frequently attend IEP meetings for ELLs whom receive special education services in order to set language goals pertaining to ENL. Individual meetings with parents were scheduled in order to distribute and discuss the score reports that contained the NYSESLAT 2017 test results. At these meetings, a breakdown of the student's score by modality was discussed with parents. Parents were provided with an "Understanding the Score Report" document in their home language to help them understand the data. In the meetings, goals were set about the best ways to help students improve their scores for the 2017-2018 NYSESLAT in addition to general academic goals for the school year. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We are a school that welcomes all families. Our parent coordinator, Ms Tapia, welcomes parents and facilitates any correspondence with all staff members. The vast majority of our families speak a language other than English. We have hosted Parent Association meetings, orientation meetings, a curriculum night and an Ethnic Heritage celebration. Since we have a testing grade, a number of parent workshops are offered to our families this year. ENL teachers, literacy and math coaches organize these events. The purpose of the workshops is to inform parents about testing dates, format and expectations. Parents are guided as to how to help their children get ready for the state test. English-Spanish speaking staff is encouraged to participate at these meetings and engage parents in activities that focus on important academic skills both in ELA and math. ELL parents are placed in groups guided by ENL teachers. ENL teachers provide them with reading and writing tools such as handouts with reading and writing strategies, high thinking order questions, graphic organizers, sight words, vocabulary word wall etc. Parents are given opportunity to engage in small group work and practice with their children. A series of parent workshops was held throughout the school year in order to provide information about the NYSESLAT and to provide strategies for language support at home. The bulk of the strategies centered around teaching parents about the best types of questions to ask students before, during and after reading. A major aim of the workshops was to inform parents that literacy practices can be trans-linguistic. In other words, literacy skills can be practiced at home in the families home language so that students become familiar with a certain type of questioning when they are in the classroom and can more readily transfer these literacy skills to English. The goal was to help parents fell like they could participate in their child's literacy education even if they have limited proficiency in English. A portion of every workshop was dedicated to presented information about the NYSESLAT and answering questions that parents had. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 3  4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Debra Rudolph, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS330Q School DBN: 24Q330 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Debra Rudolph Title Principal Matthew Brownstein Assistant Principal Sulay Tapia Parent Coordinator Danielle Russo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Digna Malla Parent Michelle Zytko Teacher/Subject Area Melissa Newman Teacher/Subject Area Stephanie Rosario Jessie Winston Coach Coach Stephanie Villafuerte School Counselor Madelene Chan Melissa Newman Sean Ali Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other ENL Other ENL Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q330 School Name: Helen M. Marshall Superintendent: Madelene Chan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Sulay Tapia Parent Coordinator YES NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA YES NA NA NA * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. As a school we utilize information that has been provided to us through the registration process as per the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), oral interview of parents/guardians, as well as the data from the Adult Preferred Language report.. This information is available in ATS. Based on the this information, we locate and provide translated versions of DOE documents to provide families information that is specific to their preferred language of communication. 7  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Bengali Chinese English Pilipino (Tagalog) Arabic Spanish 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Report Cards (3x) Sept/Mar/June Progress Report Forms pertaining to the students' health safety and discipline matters February September Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. These written translations will be provided to the parents in a timely fashion by in-house staff members or by using the services of the DOE translation unit. These written translations will be provided to the parents in a timely fashion by in-house staff members or by using the services of the DOE translation unit. 8  Permission slips for after-school programs/events, clubs, and field trips Sept.-June Curriculum matters and school news (ex. NYS exam, testing dates, and curriculum newsletters) Sept.-June These written translations will be provided to the parents in a timely fashion by in-house staff members or by using the services of the DOE translation unit. These written translations will be provided to the parents in a timely fashion by in-house staff members or by using the services of the DOE translation unit. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Elementary School Parent Teacher Conferences Sept/November/January/May (4x)) Tuesday Parent Engagement Meetings Weekly provide interpretation service(s)? P.S. 330Q translates all school letters, flyers, handbooks, newsletters, announcements and teacher created documents into Spanish for parents/ guardians. We utilize school messenger as a follow up for notices that are sent home. The messages are recorded bilingually and the automated system calls all homes. Grade newsletters and school-wide event calendars are sent home monthly. Oral interpretation services will be provided to the parents when needed. Interpretation services will be provided by in-house staff members, parent volunteers, and/or by outside DOE contracted vendors. P.S. 330Q translates all school letters, flyers, handbooks, newsletters, announcements and teacher created documents into Spanish for parents/ guardians. We utilize school messenger as a follow up for notices that are sent home. The messages are recorded bilingually and the automated system calls all homes. Grade newsletters and school-wide events 9  Monthly PTA Meetings Monthly (Sept-June) Breakfast with the Principal Sessions (Coffee Talk) Monthly (Sept-June) calendars are sent home monthly. Oral interpretation services will be provided to the parents when needed. Interpretation services will be provided by in-house staff members, parent volunteers, and/or by outside DOE contracted vendors. P.S. 330Q translates all school letters, flyers, handbooks, newsletters, announcements and teacher created documents into Spanish for parents/ guardians. We utilize school messenger as a follow up for notices that are sent home. The messages are recorded bilingually and the automated system calls all homes. Grade newsletters and school-wide events calendars are sent home monthly. Oral interpretation services will be provided to the parents when needed. Interpretation services will be provided by in-house staff members, parent volunteers, and/or by outside DOE contracted vendors. P.S. 330Q translates all school letters, flyers, handbooks, newsletters, announcements and teacher created documents into Spanish for parents/ guardians. We utilize school messenger as a follow up for notices that are sent home. The messages are recorded bilingually and the automated system calls all homes. Grade newsletters and school-wide events calendars are sent home monthly. Oral interpretation services will be provided to the parents when needed. Interpretation services will be provided by in-house staff members, parent volunteers, and/or by outside DOE contracted vendors. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, the school has updated blue cards in our Building Response Team kit. We then utilize School Messenger and Remind as a way to contact families. These communication strategies are available in our parents' languages so we can reach each other and share next steps. 0  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Information pertaining to translation and interpretations will be distributed to all staff members in September at a staff meeting and via email so that they are fully aware of how to use translation services and over-the-phone interpretation services. Further, a professional development session will be organized exclusively of translations and interpretation services to help staff members become aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Welcome Poster is prominently displayed in our school's main entrance as well as a sign that lets parents know that interpretation services are available. All parents are provided with a Parents Bill of Rights and Guide to Language Access to inform them of their rights to interpretation. A language ID guide is kept at the security desk and in the main office to assist families in identifying appropriate interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys will be given in the language preferences of our parent community to collect feedback from families on the quality and availability of services. The surveys used will be templates available from the Language Access Kit. Further, parents will be asked to complete feedback forms directly following a workshop again in the language preferences of our families. The data collected from these feedback forms are used to determine next steps for improvement. 1 
