 27Q333 School Name: GOLDIE MAPLE ACADEMY Principal: ANGELA LOGAN-SMITH   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Goldie Maple Academy 27Q333 342700010333 Pre-K -8 th School Number (DBN): 365 Beach 56 th Street, Arverne, NY 11692 718-945-3300 Phone Number: Fax: 718-945-3303 Principal Angela Logan-Smith alogansmith@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Email Address: Angela Logan-Smith Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: N/A Ms Lyons Christina Mastroserio n/a n/a n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 27 Ms. Jennifer Ambert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd. Ozone Park, New York 11416 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jambert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 642-5770 Phone Number: 7183482994 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens Borough South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, New York 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-642-5839 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Angela Logan-Smith Faith Mack / Solomon Bennett SuefanMarquez N/A N/A N/A Christina Mastroserio Jodi King *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Anita Figueroa Sonia Johnson -Archer Natasha Brown Zakia Dunson Marilyn Williams Griselda Vile Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/CSA Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our mission is to prepare scholars to become inquisitive thinkers and problem-solvers, who are invested in their academic success and take ownership of their educational goals.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Goldie Maple Academy is a PreK-8th grade Core Knowledge school located in the Arverne section of Queens, New York. The school is an application school and it is non zoned. We have 426 scholars and our attendance rate is 97.1%. 30 of our scholars are in Special Education. For the 2018-2019 school year, our pre-kindergarten - second grade classes will remain self contained but our third -eighth grade classes will be departmentalized. Each grade will have two- four staff members teaching specific subjects. This will included out self contained class. Those students will be served through a co teaching model for the four content areas. We believe this will permit our staff to work in the content areas they have the most success in while providing students with more staff they are exposed to. As a Core Knowledge school, we believe in educational excellence and equity for our scholars. A sequenced plan for coherent learning is taught from grade to grade and includes a broad range of historical, scientific and cultural topics. The Arts are integrated throughout the school day. Scholars have the opportunity to discover their talents in art and music. We also expose scholars to the Arts by experiencing the main cultural institutions. During the 2017-2018 school year, Goldie Maple Academy utilized Go Math for grades k-8. The program did not provide the rigor and differentiation we were looking for. As a result, for the 2018-2019 school year we will use Engage NY as the math curriculum for all grades prek-8. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. For the 2018-2019 school year, our special education population has increase from the past year. This in large part is related to the opening of two I.C.T. classes. With all of our special needs students, the goal is to work on their socialization as well as academic deficits. They are with the same population for the majority of the day and tend to only interact with those students in their rooms. There is also a issue with the teacher's level of expertise as the students move up in grade. We have to ensure all students receive the same level of instruction. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of focus related to the Framework for Great Schools is building strong family and community ties. Parent engagement was an area has been a constant area of concern for the committee. We did make some progress during the past school year such as enrolling more parents in the grading system to retrieve their child's grades and communicate with teachers, there were issues that arose. During the 2017 -2018 school year, grade members held monthly parent workshops geared toward the issues raised with the parents on those grades. Those meetings were not well attended leaving those that did come out, with a sense the sessions were not mandatory and/or needed. As we look towards the 2018-2019 school year, we will return to parent outreach methods that have shown to be effective such as specific parent teacher conference times and monthly student celebrations. We also found many issues with Engrade as a reporting and communication tool. For this reason, we changed to a different platform, Skedula. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q333 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 428 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 8 8 15 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 10 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 79.0% % Attendance Rate 70.1% % Reduced Lunch 0.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.7% 20.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.98 0% 22% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 41.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 95% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 9 9 94.3% 8.9% 6.8% 69.9% 3.5% 3.7% 2 27% 8.6 29.7% 93% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the N.Y.S. 2018 math exam, 30 % of our scholars scored at a level 3 or 4. This is a increase of from last year but still below the district and city average. In the category of rigorous Instruction from the NYC 2015-2016 School Survey, Goldie Maple Academy scored 69% in positive responses. Our strengths are setting clear expectations for professors and scholars, providing quality instruction in Math and while providing a supportive learning environment as noted by the Excellent rating on the 2017-2018 School Quality Snapshot. Our needs include developing a more collaborative teaching format and improving rigorous instruction. Thus, both points will be addressed within our CEP goals so that student achievement in Math is afforded to all students and we continue to make gains. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our scholars scores for math will increase by 5% on class assessments, monthly cumulative test and daily math oral conversations. 2 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Professors Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Daily focus walk- throughs Ongoing Feedback Conversations using ADVANCE reports Weekly Content and Grade Team Meetings Professional Development Workshops Use of data notebooks to organize and analyze data during collaborations. Use of scholar portfolios to assess learning of students. Use IO Assessments and Castle Learning PreK-8 K-8 Professors will lead meetings, Administration will observe and provide feedback Professors, Administration will review and provide feedback Professors, Administration will support staff Teachers will implement, administration will observe implementation and make recommendations as needed. Use of EngageNY resources All Professors The school will embed AIS into the school day for specific classes. Those classes that do not have that course will benefit from an added writing course with scripted curriculum covering the various genres. Each day, teachers will take part in one of these course to improve their students basis ELA skills. Both classes will incorporate student self assessments, targeted grouping of students, and teacher feedback related to the given task. Pre-K to 8th students Sept 2018 to June 2019 3 Professors and school administrators will conduct workshops for parents during school sponsored activities to expose and develop their understanding of the Common Core standards and the school's rigorous instructional practices. Parents Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator will develop a yearly plan; the PC, Professors, and administrators will implement; administrators will oversee. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. For 2018-2019, all parents will continue to receive a copy of the curriculum plan for their child(ren). Along with the pacing calendar providing in the monthly newsletters, parents will be able to review the information and provide support to their child(ren) when they are home. All professors will speak with parents at the Meet the Teacher Night held in September 2018. This will be the first opportunity for parents to discuss their selection of workshops to be held during the 2018-2019 school year. Parent workshops will be ongoing, taking place during school sponsored activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will leverage the school budget, district office personnel and school-based personnel to achieve this annual goal and to implement this action plan. Money in the budget will be aligned to provide for consultant for our new writing program and math support. Our teachers will be able to attend more professional development sessions since funds for substitutes will be provided by the district. We will continue to receive support for math instruction from district personnel. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During the first faculty conference, teachers were told the need to increase the number of assessments given . Each teacher was charged to give a weekly quiz and monthly cumulative assessment for each content area he/she teaches each month starting in September 2018 . Administrators collected the assessment calendar listing the dates and subjects each assessment would be given per grade/subject. Subsequently, administrators will send teachers a calendar indicating when the assessments would be collected and recording system Skedula would be reviewed. 4  In monthly grade-level meetings, teachers and administration will meet to discuss the various forms of summative and formative assessments to determine student needs and progress. Teachers will meet with colleagues to complete inquiry protocol and analyze the student work to make instructional adjustments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instrument of measure will be the IO Classroom assessments aligned with the specific standards for the month. Data from pre- and post-assessments give monthly will also be used by all Professors to get a sense of the students strength and weaknesses. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In the category of Supportive Environment from the NYC 2017-2018 School Survey, Goldie Maple Academy scored xx % in positive responses. Our year of implementation to start the Sanford Harmony Program was 2016-17 at Goldie Maple Academy. The program was introduced to address the social and emotional needs of our scholars. The program promotes building positive relationships among scholars through respect and understanding of others. For the upcoming school year, we will focus on activities such as "Meet Up" and "Buddy Up" on a daily basis which are designed to encourage scholars to interact and develop friendships with one another. "Respect For All' is an annual and year-long tradition at Goldie Maple Academy. Across the school, scholars are learning, writing and living a virtue a month. The following are our virtues: September-Respect, October-Responsibility, November-Gratitude, December-Cooperation, January-Perseverance, February-Individuality, March-Integrity, April-Confidence, May-Patience, June-Joyfulness. We will continue to expand our partnership with the Leadership Program to provide "College Access For All" for our scholars in grades 6-8. This program helps encourage and prepare our scholars for college by providing a series of workshops with a culminating trip to visit a college. The PTA room will provide space and resources for hosting Parent workshops that are geared to support their children in this process. Middle School scholars will continue to participate in the "Star Track" program with the Queens District Attorney's office where lawyers explain how the legal system works and different issues that arise. At the end of the program, middle school scholars are taken on a trip to the court house. Every month, we honor one student from each class as "the student of the month" and the most improved. We also recognize scholars who have perfect attendance. These scholars receive a certificate and a prize for these distinctions. High performing middle school scholars are placed on the honor roll and are recognized at an assembly. 6  We also honor professors with a "Gimme 5" bulletin board posted by the main office. Professors can receive a "high 5" for their exceptional work in the classroom, achieving a notable milestone with their scholars or assisting others. This board is updated on a weekly basis. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, there will be a 20% increase in positive responses in the Supportive Environment Category as measured by the 2017-2018 New York City School Survey. Pending outcome of the (2016-2017 School Survey) 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Guidance Counselor will push into classes to develop the school's Respect for All program, the school's virtues and other school related children-friendly initiatives. Pre-K-8 th Sept 2018 to June 2019 The guidance counselor will initiate, and professors will assist, Administrators will oversee. Professors will implement. Administrators will oversee. Lawyers from Program will implement. Teachers will assist. Classroom professors will support by preparing scholars for the student led conferences. Administration will provide support. Led by professors and administration Implement Sanford Harmony Program. Scholars who need extra support will be identified and strategies will be implemented using the program. In addition, the guidance counselor will meet with specific scholars individually. Star Track Program for Middle School Scholars Scholars of K - 8 Sept 2018 to June 2019 6-8 scholars Sept 2018 to June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 Families will be notified of the push-in counseling sessions and of the student goals. Students will conduct Student-Led conferences and will inform their parents of their goals. Parent workshops will be held on the "Sanford harmony program, and College Access for All". Parents of scholars of the Goldie Maple Academy Award assemblies are held monthly and honor scholars with student of the month, most improved and honor roll. Families are invited to attend. PreK-8th and Families 8 "Gimme 5" Bulletin Board for professors Select Professors Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In the xx-xx a PTA room will be designated on the first floor to invite and host various parent-outreach programs and workshops. In this room, we will house various resources such as technology and books to assist parents and families from the Goldie Maple Academy community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will leverage the school budget and school personnel to achieve this annual goal and to implement this action plan. Money will be allocated to provide for subs, so that teachers may observe Student-Led Conferences at other schools, and school personnel will support the plan by meeting with the Guidance Counselor and providing support as needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. When school surveys are available to the public, the data will be reviewed to determine areas of growth and decrease. In addition, we will be tracking the areas of concern for parents, teachers and students. Those areas below 80% will be added to our school’s focus for the 2018-2019 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be the NYC 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the category of Collaborative Teachers from the NYC 2017-2018 School Survey, Goldie Maple Academy scored xx % in positive responses. Based on the survey results, the professors expressed a high interest in collaborating with administration and staff to improve the functioning of the school. A schedule has been created for professors to meet both vertically and horizontally in professional learning communities. This schedule has allowed professors to dive into analyzing student work and data trends during their grade level and content area team meetings. These strategies were implemented in their classrooms for a cycle. The teams would then meet to discuss how the strategy worked and what improvements need to be made. Professors are also encouraged to conduct inter-visitations among their colleagues to observe best practices and areas of need. In the middle of the school year, there will be a formal inter-visitation schedule. Professors will meet with their colleagues before the visitation to discuss the plan. During the visitation, professors will have a focus sheet to track what the professor and scholars are doing in the classroom. After the visitation, the professors will meet to discuss their findings and next steps. This year, professors collaborate to create monthly projects and newsletters for parents. They also contribute to the Goldie Maple Gazette-a monthly newsletter for professors by sharing accomplishments in the classroom as well as exciting events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 0  By June 2018, there will be a 10% increase in the number of positive responses responses in the Collaborative Teacher Category as measured by the 2016-2017 New York City School Survey. Pending results. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professors will engage in PLCs in which a topic will be explored and implemented on a 3 to 4 weeks and teachers will rotated who leads. All Professors November 2017-June 2018 Professors will conduct inter-visitations with their colleagues to observe best practices and areas in need. December 2017-June 2018 Professors will analyze student work and assessments of students with disabilities and low performing students to identify areas of need. Strategies will be pulled from journal articles and taught to these scholars during small group instruction. All Professors November 2017 - June 2018 Professors will develop a strategy per round that they could recommend for parents. All Professors Monthly parent workshops will be conducted focused on the strategy. Parents November 2017- June 2018 Professors will implement, administration will oversee, initiate, join meetings,and support, lead teachers will report outcomes. Professors will implement, administrators will give feedback Lead teachers will implement and administrators will oversee. Professors collaborate to create grade level monthly newsletters which include the curriculum topics, projects, and important dates. Newsletters are sent home with scholars so that parents can support the learning at home. All professors and parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The monthly newsletter will continue to provide a communication tool and resource for parents and families. The use of Skudula will also be used to facilitate seamless communication between the school community and school-based staff. 2  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources that will be leverages will be the school budget, district personnel and in-school personnel. The budget will be used to purchase teacher resources libraries. District office staff and in-school administrators will support the process and in-school personnel will be used to implement the strategies, develop new ones, and make recommendations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, the Collaborative Teachers Category in the School Survey will be administered to the professors to gage our progress towards meeting the goal of a 10% increase in positive responses Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC School Survey: Collaborative Teachers Category Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the Goldie Maple Academy 2017-2018 School Survey, 78% of the teachers believe the principal sets high standards for student learning. 81% of the parents believe the principal works to create a sense of community in the school. A priority need that will be addressed is to ensure that curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well coordinated across the different grade levels at the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the principal will create increased opportunities for teacher leadership roles and strengthen teacher capacity evidenced by an increase of at least 30% more team members and committees. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal will meet with the school's SLT to design, communicate, and develop a plan of action of that will result in a clear vision that is understood by all stakeholders. Principal will communicate to all teachers through weekly email updates, a Newsletter designed to highlight the vision, and by articulating the vision in every aspect of the school life Administrator and professors Sept 2017-April 2018 All scholars will set target goals as they are related to the vision/goal. These goals will be expressed to parents during the Parent-Teacher Conferences by way of student-led conferences. Scholars Sept 2017 to June 2018 Principal will communicate vision to SLT, Parents, and professors. Administrators will oversee the progress of the professors' sub-visions/goals. Administrators will initiate, oversee and implement. Professors will implement for sub-visions and will oversee for scholars'' goals. Decision making that is focused on the school vision and mission is shared with teachers, staff, and the community by collaborating with school leadership team, PTA, committees, staff, District, and community members. Professors,staff and community. Sept 2017 to June 2018 Administration, professors, and scholars. Quarterly parent meetings will be held to engage parents in conversations to improve the school. Administration and Parents Administration Sept 2017 to June 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All parents will receive the parent handbook that outlines the school and city polices. In addition, each parent will be given the cell phone numbers of administration. This will give them direct access to personnel if the need arise to voice their concerns. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 5  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources used will be the school's budget and school personnel. Money in the budget will be used to promote parent engagement by using Title I funds. School personnel will develop and communicate the vision. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of October 2018 the positions will be posted to fill the leadership roles and committees. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will include applications, minutes and agendas which will help in reviewing participation and analysis of the progress of meeting this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the Goldie Maple Academy Framework for Great Schools Report 2017, an analysis of parent involvement data revealed a slight decrease in parent involvement at workshops and meetings. While we provided many meeting opportunities for parents, the majority of the session did not have more than ten parents in attendance. As a result, we will be working to increase parent involvement for the 2018-2019 school year. PupilPath, Class Dojo, and Remind are tools we use to communicate with our families. Parents are able to view their child's grades, homework, assessments, and projects through PupilPath. Class Dojo documents show prekindergarten - second scholars are following the expectations in the classroom. Through Class Dojo, families and professors can communicate back and forth through online messaging. Remind is an app which sends out announcements to families. This tool is especially useful in the middle school. Parents also receive a monthly grade level newsletter which includes the monthly learning topics, project assignments and important dates. Monthly parent workshops are conducted by professors on various topics related to the grade or content area. We are partners with an online program called "First in Math". Parents are encouraged to have their children log in at home in order to reinforce the math skills learned at school. Scholars earn points and certificates for completing assignments in First in Math. In the upcoming year, we will partner with IO Education to support students for the ELA and Math assessments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, communication with families will increase by 20% as evidenced by the parent involvement in school -level decision making, instructional initiatives, and overall culture of the learning environment surveys. 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents and families Sept 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Administration, Professors, PTA, and SLT members Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Instructional strategies/activities Parental Workshops and Information Meetings Professional Development 1.PD will be given on the following topics: i. Use of Parent Workshops: Thanksgiving Feast, Mommies and Muffins, Daddies and Donuts, , Mother’s Day Dinner, Father’s Day Breakfast, Bullying, Household Safety, and Parenting ii. Use of parent volunteers iii. Use of Parent teacher conferences and progress reports iv. Use of PA monthly general membership v. Use of End of school celebration vi. Use of Meet the teacher vii. Use of Open house viii. Use of Pre-K and K orientations ix. Use of nw parent orientations x. Evening celebrations per year for all families Communication i. Parent Newsletters ii. Skedula, Class Dojo, Remind 8  Community Outreach Donations: Parents and families September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Administration, Professors, PA, and SLT members i. collections and distributions of food and clothing items ii. local businesses provide fire safety workshops, pre-teen information via assemblies iii. Job and Career Fair. Principal, school personnel, PA President, and the Parent Coordinator will work to combine meetings where there are large parent turn-outs with PA and Title I meetings Parents and families September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Administration, Professors, PA and SLT members. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title 1 funds will be used to provide consultants for workshops and food for meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, sign in sheets from monthly PTA meetings, parent events, and workshops will be evaluated to determine if attendance has increased from January 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be parent sign-in sheets and communication from parents within the SLT meetings. 9  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) For grades 4-8 prior years State Exams & pre and post monthly Assessments. For grades 1-3 pre and post monthly assessments Mathematics For grades 4-8 prior years State Exams & pre and post monthly Assessments. For grades 1-3 pre and post monthly assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one-to-one, tutoring During the school day and morning Small group, one-to-one, tutoring During the school day and morning 1. Common Core Learning Standards aligned with ELA test preparation book (Coach) 2. Data Teams 4 Learning monthly assessments (pre and post) to determine direction of instruction and grouping of levels 3. Differentiated Instruction 4. MY ON reading program (computer lab, iPad classroom carts) 5. SETS Wilson program pull out push in 6. Skill driven literacy instruction (data teams) 1. Common CoreLearning Standards aligned with math test preparation book (Coach) 2. Data Teams 4 Learning monthly assessments (pre and post) to determine direction of instruction and grouping of levels 1  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 3. Differentiated instruction 4. Instruction based in assessed needs for targeted instruction that is skills based, using Coach, Options, Common core Standards and assessments. 1. Daily whole and small group instruction 2. Skills based and Lab (hands-on) approach using FOSS, DSM, DELTA, and Coach Science materials and activities 3. Students receive at least 70 minutes a week of Lab/Hands-on learning 1. Daily whole and small group instruction 2. All sessions are skill based, as well as using the inquiry driven model 3. Materials used are Core Knowledge and NY State Regents and DBQ scaffolding format. Provide information, support and direction for staff and parents concerning procedures for evaluation of “at risk” students. Offer referral services to community agencies and coordinate the services to apply improved personal/social/academic functioning. Conducts sessions with teacher to discuss alternate behavior strategies that could be For grades 4-8 prior years State Exams & pre and post monthly Assessments. For grades 1-3 pre and post monthly assessments For grades 4-8 prior years State Exams & pre and post monthly Assessments. For grades 1-3 pre and post monthly assessments Guidance Counselor:ERSSA provider facilitates students and or groups. On-going support/counseling sessions for “at risk” students identified with social/emotional issues interfering with school performance. School Psychologist: IN class Push in model. Provide Small group, one-to-one, tutoring During the school day and morning Small group, one-to-one, tutoring During the school day and morning One-to-one and small group. During the school day and morning Sessions vary based on individual needs. 2  assistance for students at risk. incorporated into the class. (Frequency: sessions vary base on individual student needs. 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are two students in Temporary Housing. We are monitoring their placement and staying in contact with the representative from both agencies. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in Temporary Housing will be provided with uniforms, school supplies, and other clothing items as necessary. The parents will have the opportunity to work with the parent coordinator to discuss any family needs or supports that the school can provide or refer to the families. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. To be provided. 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administration and professors will create a recruitment team. The team will set up a booth at NYC teacher hiring fairs. Professors will hand out brochures and speak to prospective professors about the benefits of working at Goldie Maple Academy. Prospective professors will complete applications. Once applications are reviewed and a professor is hired, retention will be the focus. New professors will be paired with mentors. We will have a new professor weekly meeting where they can discuss what is working and what they need to work on, as well as our next steps and their next steps. We will also celebrate our new professors' accomplishments through rewards and praise. Experienced professors will have the opportunity to take on professor leadership positions within the building. Professors will receive differentiated professional development based on their needs and interests. They will also be encouraged to seek out their own professional development opportunities. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). To ensure that high quality teaching practices we will provide ongoing professional development that includes providing: One-on-one professional development with the administrators/instructional leaders; Opportunities for inter-school visitations; Engaging in PLCs; and Conducting weekly team/data meetings with colleagues. We believe in improving the teaching of academic subjects by contributing to an increase in teachers’ knowledge of the academic subjects they teach, consistent with the state’s content 6  standards, to enable children to meet these standards. • Provide training in the use of effective, scientifically based instructional strategies for a diverse range of students, helping to close the achievement gap. • Support the district and school needs assessments and district and school plans, including Program/Activity Plans and Title I Unified Plans, if applicable. • Draw on resources available under other programs such as Title IIA, and from other sources. *Create a teacher-center//led committee to create and execute PDs to teachers, while working closely with administration • Include strategies for developing curricula and teaching methods that integrate academic and vocational instruction (including applied learning and team teaching) if an LEA determines such strategies are appropriate. • Include strategies for identifying and eliminating gender and racial bias in instructional materials, methods, and practices. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 7  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Aligned and spiraling Core Knowledge Curriculum. Our Prek social worker will continue holding sessions for parent regarding the transition from pre-kindergarten to kindergarten. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers collaborate among their grade levels and content areas weekly to determine the appropriate assessments to use during instruction and how to use the data to drive instruction. Various professional developments are offered to help drive the data (data analysis team) and proper use and administration of assessments. In order to assist our preschool children who are transitioning from early childhood programs to elementary school, we have instituted a variety of social/emotional and academic supports. In the late spring 2019, preschoolers will have a series of visits in the elementary school classes to help them prepare for this transition. On one visit, they will tour the building and the elementary school classes with their families. On another visit, they will spend an hour in an elementary school class, participating in an activity with the professor and the other. scholars. Our pre-school scholars will continue to utilize the strategies they have learned in the Sanford Harmony Social Emotional Program in the Elementary school classes. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 179,101 38,479 N/A N/A 2,077,298 X X X 8 Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5A,B,C,D,E, Sections 5A,B,C,D,E,  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 9  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Goldie Maple Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Goldie Maple Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school 1  surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; 2  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Goldie Maple, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA)) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 3   notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences;  ensuring the correct contact information is know to all parents and guardian for all stakeholders at the school. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 4  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name Goldie Maple Academy Borough Queens School Number 333 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal A. LOGAN-SMITH Coach None ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher None Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent M. BARTON Assistant Principal Griselda Vile Coach None School Counselor Parent N/A Parent Coordinator S. COLEMAN Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 435 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.00% 6  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? There are no ELLs currently in our school. However, if there were to be an ELL we would first administer the HLIS. If the student requires further testing for placement based on the results of the HLIS, then we would use the Fountas and Pinnell and /or teacher -created assessments. to determine placement levels.+ 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 7  The students' progress will be continuously monitored to determine whether or not goals and or services need to be changed or adjusted to reflect students' current needs. Every effort will be made to ensure that strategies are culturally and linguistically responsive. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Students will be screened initially and then based on their levels of proficiency they will receive ESL support services such as Tier 1 Core Instruction to support language development. Periodically the efficiency of these instructional strategy will be assessed to determine if they meet the students language development needs. If they do not, then Tier 2 strategies such as intensive targeted intervention strategies will be implemented for those students who are not making sufficient progress on the competencies being measured. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We would assess students on the NYSITELL and use the results to identify placement levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. N/A b. TBE program. If applicable. There are currently no ELL students in our school. However if there were, since we are a small school we would use a push in model with homogeneous grouping. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We would have .5 unit of study in Integrated ENL/ Content area or ENL/ELA class for a 90 minute block for emerging and transitioning proficiency level students. We would also have1 unit of study in ENL/ ELA or other content area for expanding levels of proficiency as per Part 154.2 CR. Students would be programmed based on their NYSESLAT or LAB-R proficiency levels reflecting the mandated ESL/ELA instructional hours. The ELL teacher and the guidance counselor would ensure that all mandated instructional minutes are provided. 8  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. To meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards, we would hire a highly qualified ESL teacher to provide rigorous instruction to our students. The teacher would need to use instructional strategies that support language development such as : language and vocabulary development strategies including graphic organizers; think, pair , share; It says I say; tiered vocabulary instruction; text analysis; using cognates; mind movies; word walls and triple entry journals. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ENL teacher would periodically assess students in their native language. Depending on their ESL classification, students would also be encouraged to take NYS exams in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Based on their levels of proficiency, instructional strategies would be implemented that best support these levels and periodically monitored to target needs of specific population. For example, targeted intervention strategies like small group focused instruction would be used for areas like vocabulary development and building oral language capacity. If they are also students with IEPs there mandates would be addressed to ensure compliance. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers would use a variety of strategies to differentiate and target instruction with additional support given where necessary. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ESL/ENL instruction would be integrated. Additional support would be provided via our school-wide Academic Intervention Services program to provide additional scaffolding and targeted instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. See 9 below 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Once new students are administered the HLIS and eligibility is determined for ELL services, every effort will be made to ensure that parents understand the three program choices (Transitional Bilingual Education, Dual Language, Freestanding ENL) that are available. A parent orientation will be provided to all eligible students where the parent video is shown and the various options are explained by both administration and the parent coordinator. During the parent orientation, parents will be given the parent survey and the selection forms. The Foreign Language teacher will be utilized to translate forms and to provide interpretation services during the parent orientation. Parents can select the program of their choice. The Spanish Language teacher in the building will be utilized whenever possible and as her schedule permits to provide orientation to the students. The Foreign Language teacher, Ms. Rose, and the Special Education teacher, Ms. Powell are responsible for administering the HLIS, LAB-R, and informal interview. Ms. Rose is a certified foreign language teacher and Ms. Powell is a certified special educator and Testing Coordinator. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 9  Not applicable 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. School-wide AIS program and instructional support as per CR 154.2. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials to support ELL instruction would include audio and video, as well as current textbooks and the simultaneous use of English and alternative language editions on the NYS Exams. Native language /English language dictionaries as well as picture dictionaries would also be utilized. Technology would be utilized to support ELL Including the use of SmartBoard Technology, laptops and desktop computers, I-pads with native language translation and listening capabilities. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support would be provided through the use of bi-lingual word and picture dictionaries, bi-lingual glossaries and native language translation on laptop and desktop computers, I-pads, as well as teachers and peers that speak the native language that native language support is provided. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We would ensure that support services and resources correspond to student need (based on assessment) and/or IEP. Additionally, Academic Intervention Services would be be assigned per grade level to ensure success in meeting instructional goals. Tutoring services would also be considered based on grade and or proficiency levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials to support ELL instruction would include audio and video, as well as current textbooks and the simultaneous use of English and alternative language editions on theNYS Exams. Native language /English language dictionaries as well as picture dictionaries would also be utilized. Technology would be utilized to support ELL Including the use of SmartBoard Technology, laptops and desktop computers, I-pads with native language translation and listening capabilities. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). ATS reports will be reviewed periodically to ensure that newly enrolled ELLs will receive the services they require. The Parent Coordinator will also conduct outreach to new parents via phone calls and parent meetings/workshops to ensure that the HLIS is completed upon admission. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The language elective for ELLs would be the same offered to the general education population: i.e. Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable 0  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Not applicable Not applicable 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Not applicable Not applicable Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Not applicable 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Not applicable Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. We do not currently have an ELL population and we have not had one for the past four years. 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Angela Logan-smith, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Goldie Maple Academy School DBN: 27Q333 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) A. LOGAN-SMITH Title Principal G.Vile Assistant Principal S. COLEMAN Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent P. POWELL Teacher/Subject Area M. BARTON Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member R. FOX Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/19/16 05/08/17 1/19/16 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/19/16 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/19/16 1/19/16 1/19/16 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 3  DBN: 27Q333 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Goldie Maple Academy Superintendent: Jennifer Ambert The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Deonne Rose Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At the beginning of the school year the school used various tools including parent language needs surveys, the ATS system, as well as updated blue emergency cards to determine the language needs of the parents and students. The Parent Association will also conduct informal interviews about home language to determine translation and or interpretation services parents might need. The School Leadership Team in conjunction with the Parent Association members will determine the documents that need to be translated throughout the year and instances where interpretation services are required, for example Parent teacher Conferences and Parent Meetings. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 4  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Bengali Spanish English Mandarin Haitian Creole French Chinese 2 18 399 0 1 1 2 .047 4.26 94.33 0 .024 .024 .047 2 18 398 2 1 2 0 0.47 4.2 94.09 .047 .24 .47 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent Handbook September/yearly Grade Newsletter Every month Progress reports & report cards Every five weeks Lunch menus Monthly Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The Spanish version will be completed by the AP. All others will receive an attached letter stating this documents needs to be translated. The Spanish version will be completed by the AP. All others will receive an attached letter stating this documents needs to be translated. The Spanish version will be completed by the AP. All others will receive an attached letter stating this documents needs to be translated. The various languages that are available on line will be delivered to those classes that require translated forms. Those not available will receive an attached letter stating this document needs to be translated. 5  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Meet the Teacher Night September/ Yearly Parent Teacher Conferences Three times per school year Monthly Grade Parent Workshops Monthly for each grade Senior Parent Meeting October 2018 (a.m. & p.m.) interpretation service(s)? We have staff on hand to translate for Spanish and Sign Language. If a parent speaks a different language, they are asked to bring someone to help with the translation services. We have staff on hand to translate for Spanish and Sign Language. If a parent speaks a different language, they are asked to bring someone to help with the translation services. We have staff on hand to translate for Spanish and Sign Language. If a parent speaks a different language, they are asked to bring someone to help with the translation services. We have staff on hand to translate for Spanish and Sign Language. If a parent speaks a different language, they are asked to bring someone to help with the translation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school has staff members that speak Spanish, our secondary language. When the need arises, the parent will be connected with an staff member that will provided assistance in the event of an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 6  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Welcome Poster is available in the Main Lobby and the Language ID Guide will be available at the security desk and the Main Office. For non-cover language, we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word" Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys will be conducted at least 3 times during the year to gather feedback on the quality and availability of language access. the Parent Coordinator and the PTA President will also conduct surveys during their meetings with parents. 7 
