2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 24Q455 School Name: NEWTOWN HIGH SCHOOL Principal: JOHN FICALORA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Newtown High School 342400011455 9-12 School Number (DBN): 455 48-01 90 th Street Elmhurst NY 11373 718.595.8500 718.595.8584 Phone Number: Catherine G Tsouristakis Fax: ctsouri@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: John J Ficalora Joseph Doyle SzymonSondej Email Address: Parents’ Association President: Gabriela Altomarino SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Glenda Knox Chelsea Tejada Kaylin Tepi N/A District Information Geographical District: 24 Superintendent’s Office Address: Elaine Lindsey Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place, Rm. 405Flushing, NY 11354 ELindse@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 281-3517 Phone Number: (718) 281-7690 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Queens North FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Lawrence Pendergrast Executive Director: 2811 Queens Plaza North Long Island City NY lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718.828.5488 Phone Number: 718-391-8222 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Gabriela Altomarino Anthony Charalambous Member/staff Member/staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5 John J. Ficalora Joseph Doyle SzymonSondej Glenda Knox Chelsea Tejada KaylinTepi N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) John Weigel Fanny Mejia Josefina Fermin TejinderKaur Member/staff Member/staff Member/parent Member/parent Member/parent Member/parent Member/parent Member/parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? MISSION STATEMENT Section 4: SCEP Overview Newtown High School is resolutely focused on academic excellence and the cultivation of individual growth and integrity that will prepare our students to assume leadership roles in all avenues of community life. We offer Advanced Placement and college preparatory programs in conjunction with a multitude of support and enrichment opportunities. Newtown provides a world-class education based on exacting standards and the application of critical thinking skills gained through real world experiences. We strive to develop academic, technological, and cultural literacy. Newtown High School is a collaborative community that embraces all of its stakeholders and recognizes their unique contributions to student success. Together we build the foundation that enables our students to meet the challenges of leadership in the twenty-first century. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. To understand Newtown High School one must first understand the student body that we serve. Our students come from about 100 different countries and speak about 59 different languages. About 24% of our students are new speakers of English and are enrolled in English as A Second Language classes, with content teachers trained in the SIOP Model in order to better serve their educational needs. The number of SIFE students continues to increase each year. Our school is organized into Small Learning Communities (SLCs) which allows us to provide all students with personalized interest based learning experiences. Our ninth graders begin their high school experience as members of our Freshmen Academy. The Freshmen Academy organization supports students in transitioning to high school through activities and a curriculum which supports their growth and academic success. Our Freshman Academy has been a way to help transition students from 8th grade into a high school environment without losing a sense of someone watching over them. The Academy has students who travel together in a cohort and share the same teachers and counselor. The staff meets regularly to discuss the educational needs of the students in their cohort as well as the socio-emotional needs of the students to ensure success at Newtown High School. Beginning in tenth grade, students transition to our other academies which are: the Engineering Aces, Forensics Academy, Business Academy, and Arts & Media Academy, During ninth grade, our students select one of our other SLCs in which to spend the following three years. We also have an International SLC to serve the needs of our ESL/Bilingual population. Within the SLC a distributive leadership model is used to provide every teacher the opportunity to lead in a crucial area directly related to that SLC. There is a dedicated counselor, dean and Assistant Principal for each SLC. Each SLC conducts an Early Warning Indicators (EWI) meeting once a week using data to identify students who are not doing well in attendance, behavior or course work. The SLC structure is helping us to better serve the needs of our students and to empower teachers to plan for school improvement. We have a long-standing collaboration with Queens Community House. We have worked with them over the years to improve attendance and reduce dropouts. The Queens Community House also opens their other resources to our students. This partnerships support students and build a positive school culture. Last year, our focus was on credit accumulation, building teacher capacity, rebuilding relationships with our parent community and continuing to serve all students. We identified areas where we were able to help improve those numbers by aligning our resources to create Regents preparatory courses and after-school classes for students to get back on track. Another area of focus within our pedagogical needs revolves around Domain 3 of the Danielson Framework, specifically in student engagement and discussion. This year we plan on continuing our commitment to help teachers develop stronger skills around Domains 1 and 3. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Instructional Support Services There are a total of 252 ISS students in which 211 are in the ICT model and 41 in self-contained classes. We have students that have related services for Counseling, Speech and Language, Physical Therapy, Hearing and Vision. There are four students who have related services only and partake in the general education classes throughout their schedule. We have six students who require paraprofessionals for Alternate Language and Health purposes. The student’s needs in the classrooms require teachers to make accommodations to the lesson plans, scaffold the assigned work and keep students involved in the lesson through different pathways such as differentiating instruction, leveling the assigned activity and implementing student’s accommodations during assessment. Students are working on skills that they need to show growth in such as reading comprehension, fluency and decoding. Students are assessed using Scantron Performance Series for math and their reading lexile levels. This will assist teachers with their groupings in their classes. The teachers implement the student’s IEP goals and the school matches student’s transition needs with their programs as best as possible. Students need to build confidence and stamina to better prepare for their state exams. Teachers are building on these skills. ELL POPULATION About 24% of Newtown’s population are ELLs. We have students from various countries who speak several languages such as Spanish, Chinese, Arabic, Bengali, Urdu, Tibetan, and Nepali. At the present time, Newtown has a Transitional Bilingual Program in Spanish and a Freestanding ENL Program. The goal of both programs is to increase students’ English Proficiency while addressing content. As students develop fluency in English, instructional time in English increases depending on student language development. In our ENL Content and TBE classes, the focus is on ELL instruction in the content areas using the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol. The SIOP Model emphasizes the importance of language development across the curriculum, as well as providing ample opportunity for students to practice reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills. Teachers will continue to provide grade-level academic work in the student’s native language so that the student maintains academic progress while developing English proficiency in order to provide ensure equity and academic growth for ELL students. ELL Content and Home Language teachers use scaffolding techniques to make content more comprehensible to enrich language development. These strategies are implemented to ensure uniformity as well as consistency in the delivery of instruction to ELLs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our special initiatives this year include; focus on the Danielson competencies which teachers find most challenging, finding new ways to work with parents in support of their children, expanding teacher team opportunities to foster improved curricula and instruction that is responsive to student needs, and increased focus on the importance of attendance. We have had many accomplishments during the past year: ● The results on the school survey were very good. This is an indication of the support that the school has from parents, students and staff. With this support we can move forward together for the benefit of our students. ●The school snapshot indicates that we had excellent movement of our students to a least restrictive environment. This initiative has yielded wonderful results for our students. The attendance of our Special Education students has increased 15-20% over the past and in some months and some grades, it exceeds the attendance of general education students. There are virtually no suspensions among Special Education students. ● We have been able to maintain a relationship with Queens Community House. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  ● Our Regents results and graduation rate continue to climb. ● We have increased our AP, Honors and College Now offerings moving students to be college ready. Strengths: The SCEP goals drive the school plan around improved outcomes in graduation rate, student achievement in core content areas, student credit accumulation, attendance, and school culture. The leadership of Newtown High School collaboratively developed a multifaceted school-wide plan. Data driven strategic decisions have been made to meet the needs of our students. Collaboration, communication, and program structures have been put in place, revised as needs indicated with personnel and resources to support the structures. The school’s wall-to-wall SLC structure, which personalized the environment in all six of our SLC communities, created a personalization for all constituencies of the school. Staff roles within the SLCs are designed to enable communication amongst staff, students and their families. Each SLC has personalized the school-wide vision to meet the needs of the students who have selected that SLC. School leaders collaborate toward results oriented, ambitious, specific and measurable goals. All constituents realize that improved student achievement is the overarching priority for our community’s work. A significant component of the plan involves improving teacher effectiveness. Implementation includes observations, feedback, next steps and professional development components. (Tenet 2) Aligning our curricula across all areas of study to the Common Core Learning Standards has enabled our staff to better meet the needs of our students. Teachers share the common language of CCLS, common instructional goals, common assessments and common strategies to meet those goals. Across the school, teachers use a variety of complex materials appropriately aligned to CCLS that address student needs, incorporate the arts, technology and other enrichment opportunities, increasing rigor while aligning to CCLS. The system in place for providing students with feedback is multifaceted as well. In-class components include a variety of formative and summative assessment tools, use of rubrics and next steps. Reports are provided to both students and families in several forms besides the traditional Marking Period report cards. In addition, Report Card Conferencing after each report card allows for a one-on-one conference with every student. Parents and staff use the tools to empower students to take ownership of their learning. (Tenet 3) Newtown High School has developed a personalized learning environment for our school community through the SLC initiative. Professional development has supported the use of instructional practices that stimulate deep levels of questioning and thinking in students, engage students in learning and achieve lofty goals. Lead Teachers support teachers and teacher teams in using instructional practices and strategies that are adaptive and aligned to school-wide goals and plans, student needs for units and lessons. The school has focused its efforts on creating an environment that is both intellectually stimulating and physically safe for all students. Educators work together, with support staff, with students and families to create a thoughtful learning environment where a strong culture of mutual respect permeates throughout the entire school community. As part of this, teachers use a wide variety of data to create lessons that meet the needs of all students with strategies, adaptations, purposeful grouping, formative and summative assessments. (Tenet 4) The distributive leadership structure of the school has enabled all stakeholders to positively impact academic and social success of the students at Newtown High School. Leadership is not limited to the Principal and cabinet. It includes Lead Teachers, SLC teams, students, and families in reviewing data, providing feedback and designing a plan for addressing needs. The SLC structure enables all stakeholders to collaboratively collect, analyze and use a wide variety of data to address student social and emotional needs while creating pathways to academic success for them. (Tenet 5) Newtown High School staff shares a commitment to communicating with all constituencies, students, families, colleagues, and partners to support the child’s academic achievement and social emotional growth. Staff members work diligently to create and sustain a high level of family engagement which includes support students and their 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  families. Structures and protocols are in place that ensures communication and understanding by all stakeholders. Newtown High School’s leadership and staff share data with all constituencies in a transparent manner that is designed to empower families to support the work of the school. Students cannot be academically successful without support including these social and emotional components. (Tenet 6) Our challenges include: ● To increase attendance, Regents pass rate and graduation rate. ● To increase parent engagement. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q455 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1921 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 25 25 18 54 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 8 22 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 79.0% % Attendance Rate 75.7% % Reduced Lunch 22.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 58.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 26.09 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 79% 66% 63.2% 6.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A YES No N/A 455 329 34 89.4% 3.4% 12.2% 7.4% 26.5% 2.2% 22 14% 7.1 N/A N/A 77% 74% 68.7% 11% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A NO NO YSH NO N/A NO NO YES YES N/A YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School’s Strengths: School leaders and staff continue to communicate high expectations aligned with a path to college and career readiness. The school’s student booklet outlining how to attain an Advanced Regents diploma and college and career learning experiences continue to communicate this message. To further support the message of high expectations, this year the school increased the number of students taking AP courses, by adding an additional AP USH section and AP Studio Art, Moreover, the school offers eight honors courses, and as a part of the College Access Program, has attached a college access point person to each small learning community. (3.4) Feedback PPO visit on November 15 2017 (E. Lindsey) School’s Weakness : Academic tasks continue to inconsistently emphasize rigorous habits and higher order skills. Plans do not consistently reflect rigorous and embedded targeted instructional supports for diverse learners. Across classrooms visited students did not consistently access cognitively engaging tasks.(1.1) Feedback PPO visit on November 15 2017 (E. Lindsey) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Needs:  APs should review the Tri-State rubric and LCI practical guide to developing quality curriculum units of study (given to principals at the beginning of the school year) to support with providing teachers with feedback on unit plans for the spring semester. The original plan along with the revised plan should be collected to monitor progress. Feedback PPO visit on November 15 2017 (E. Lindsey) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an overall increase by 3% in the passing percentages on the NYS Regents Examination taken by 10th grade students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All content area teachers of 9th & 10th Grade Students Weekly through-out the year Teachers, Grade Lead Teacher, SLT Lead Teachers and Assistant Principals Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Using the Tri-State Rubric Curriculum teams in core subjects will continue to meet twice a week to  ensure alignment with CCLS to create, refine and share lesson plans. Teachers will revise curriculum maps and develop multiple entry points for ELLs, ISSs and advanced learners. Teachers will engage in focused work of infusing CCLS aligned literacy tasks across the curriculum.  engage in the creation of uniform assessments in addition to  a mock regent's exam as a midyear benchmark for all students Improve Curriculum Units: In order to support rigorous instruction, teacher teams will focus on formative assessments (3d) and designing coherent instructions (1e) to improve student outcomes by targeting needs identified according to student outcome data, building on the work we have already started. o Requirements for each unit: In teacher teams, the subject area teachers will refine the unit outline. Each unit outline is to include a pre-assessment activity, a summative assessment, as well as at least one formative assessment that incorporate the skills necessary to complete the summative assessment.  Across the school a uniform Unit Template was adopted.  Each department will also identify one to two skills that will be areas of focus for the department that are aligned to common core standards and Regents examinations. Teacher Team Minutes will be submitted to Department Supervisor. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  The Department Supervisor will review and comment on Teacher Team minutes for focus on this goal. The Department Supervisor will visit each Teacher Team at least once a MP. Across departments Student Portfolios containing department writing assessments with regent’s rubrics will be maintained and analyzed at different benchmarks throughout the year.  All assessment data including writing assessments for GE, SWD’s and ELL’s will be used to determine appropriate strategies as a next step for students. ESL and ISS teachers collaboratively plan with their content area colleagues and provide supports and strategies.  Adjustments to Units: A special education teacher and/or ENL teacher will lead at least one teacher team meeting per month to support adjustment of upcoming units with special considerations for students with disabilities and English language learners in mind. The revised units, with adjustments highlighted, will be posted on each department’s google drive (As a resource, teacher teams should use the Specific Considerations documents created by the Office of Teacher Effectiveness). ISS teachers attend content PD sessions with their co-teacher Teachers incorporate language objectives in content area daily lesson plans. Families have access to PupilPath which allows them to monitor their child’s progress in every daily subject and communicate through this system via email. Families are provided information around CCLS, literacy, and use of PupilPath At Family Night the school shares curriculum and online resources for parents: Parent workshops and support will be provided for the Ongoing Teacher pairs and Assistant Principals ESL and ISS teachers paired with their content partners Teachers, the Principal and Assistant Principals Teachers, students and family members Ongoing 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  use of PupilPath.com where the grading process and documents necessary for students to be successful will be accessible. Cohort Dinners where progress towards graduation is examined will be held in Fall for Seniors and Spring for the 11th grade. Family Curriculum Night 9/17 Fall 9/27 Spring TBD Teams of teachers collaborate to revise curricula, implement instructional strategies that engage students in learning rigorous college and career ready skilled curricula during Common Planning Time (CPT) Teachers Ongoing Principal & Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to school to meet all teachers on September 17th to receive curriculum information, grading policies and instructional foci for the upcoming school year. Ninth Grade Academy Parents will also, on the same night, be invited to attend an SLC greet with teachers and support staff to become familiar with the special supports available to their Freshmen children. Our Parent Coordinator will facilitate Monthly Parent Workshops on Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) Reading Standards and Instructional Shifts to the Common Core will support parent understanding of reading foundational skills with strategies they can use at home to support and reinforce what the students are practicing in school. This information will be made available in her Monthly Parent Newsletter as well. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources needed include: Programming: All staff members through participation in SLCs, PDs, communications and collaboration between staff, students and families. Programming to allow teachers to meet by department, SLC or whole staff. Teachers have the ability to work with colleagues within their SLC/department meet as a team to modify instruction to end with student success or tutor students during their CPT period. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Communication and collaboration between staff, family and students allows for transparency, and the ability of all constituents to be on the same page with the same goal in mind. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. All 10th Grade regents bound classes will take a baseline and end of year Performance Task. Uniform fall midterms will be assigned and analyzed in order for modifications to be made to the curriculum map(s). The midterm assessment will show a 1.5% increase from the baseline. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School generated department-wide assessments will be used for assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? School's strength Newtown High School establishes a culture where students feel safe, challenged to grow and supported to meet high expectations. This is supported by the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide - Newtown's Survey Element Score for Supportive Environment has risen from 3.52 (2016) to 4.12 (2018). Personal Attention and Support received 72% positive answers; we are scoring 11% higher then the borough and 9% higher than the city. NHS’s SLC structure is our strength and will continue to be for SY 2018-2019. We have incorporated in its design distributive leadership where each SLC is designed to support the child’s social, emotional and academic growth. The Assistant Principal, Lead Teacher, designated Guidance Counselor and SLC classroom teachers collaborate daily to positively impact student achievement through case conferencing, data collection, and analysis to address student social and emotional needs while creating pathways to academic success for them. The team’s responsibility is to address concerns before they have negative impact. SLC data is disaggregated for scholarship reports, attendance reports, and incident reports are utilized as new data becomes available during SLC daily meetings so that all constituencies know the needs of their students. Similarly, school leaders analyze disaggregated and school wide aggregated along with school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  wide disaggregated data by subgroups to create action plans that address the assessed needs. The support teams within each SLC respond to request for support from the leaders, teachers, parents, and students. Programs, services and supports are effectively in place across the school to attend many needs of some students which contributes to a healthy learning environment. Attendance Data over the last four years: (Progress Reports & School Quality Guide) School Year 2012-2013 85.3% School Year 2013-2014 85.2% School Year 2014-2015 87.0% School Year 2015-2016 88.00% School Year 2016-2017 91.10% School Year 2017-2018 89.60 (6/12) School need: In order to see this trend rise, as a school we must continue to develop a common language and uniform school protocols and procedures so that all school constituents are able to articulate how the school community is safe, conducive to learning and foster a sense of ownership that leads to higher student attendance and therefore greater student outcomes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the 10th grade attendance rate will improve by at least 2% as measured in the school’s Annual Attendance Report 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Ongoing daily, throughout the year Lead Teachers Guidance Counselors (GCs), SLC members and Assistant Principals (APs) Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). SLC recognition and celebrations for students with perfect and most improved attendance. All staff School-wide and SLC systematic and immediate parental outreach when students are absent. The SLC serves as the student’s social emotional and academic center. Students have access to academic resources, student teacher conferences, guidance counselors, behavioral support teachers and content area teachers who provide targeted intervention to students by conducting regular and frequent outreach, including those students that do not seek assistance are targeted. During common planning time, teachers are engaged in discussion with teacher teams and support staff to support the social emotional development of the students, engage in teacher planning, inquiry work, case conferencing, professional development, and targeted student tutoring. All staff members engage in collaborative discussions to improve performance, attendance, scholarship and social emotional development for students. Data is drawn from a variety of sources, including the Progress Report, the School Report Card, the Graduation Tracker, ATS reports, Marking Period Scholarship Reports, periodic assessments, Regents, NYSESLAT, and current Regents statistics, and monthly attendance reports. Departmental and SLC Inquiry teams identify at-risk students and track progress for Regents-readiness and credits. Diagnostics, mid-term and mid-year assessments, are administered and students needing additional academic support identified. Support is provided through content area classes, SLC and after-school tutoring, Saturday tutoring academy, and extended day. Teacher teams design instructional strategies that address students’ needs and support credit accumulation. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Guidance Counselors conduct cohort and SLC specific classroom lessons and assemblies focusing on graduation requirements, student programming, and the student support services available. All students Ongoing throughout the year Lead Teachers, Guidance Counselors, SLC members and Assistant Principals The 9 th Grade Advisory Program provides students with strategies for learning to help students identify their area of need and ask questions regarding their work and promoting college readiness. Students that are off-track for graduation due to lack of credit accumulation are identified and provided the following opportunities: extended day courses, online blended courses, catch-up work and physical education boot camp. Students that are off-track for graduation due to Regents examinations will be provided with specific content concepts utilizing LearnerPal. Parent Coordinator conduct outreach and monthly workshops for families including one-on-one PupilPath support for parents. Ongoing parental outreach to keep families informed of student’s progress and development include sharing opportunities for Catch-up assignments, and tutoring are communicated to parents and students via letters, phone calls and email through PupilPath. SLC intervention meeting with students, teachers, families, behavioral support teams and guidance counselors promote academic, social and emotional well- being of the students. NHS has an onsite health clinic sponsored by Plaza del Sol that provide students with physical and emotional health services. The partnership with Queens Community House for 9th grade students’ to establish a future of success. SLCs celebrate student successes in a series of academic award ceremonies where families, students, teachers, counselors and other staff recognize departmental attendance and school-wide academic achievements in an assembly format. Teachers set clear classroom expectations through the use of our NHS Student Handbook, individualized classroom and department contract that create a coherent learning environment So that student do not feel "left-behind", at the start of each ICT lesson, one teacher will sequester students who were absent the day before in order to conduct a small group "catch-up" exercise and return the student(s) to the whole class lesson ASAP. ongoing Parent Coordinators, SLC staff, students and family members Lead Teachers, Guidance Counselors, SLC members and Assistant Principals All students ongoing All teachers Principal, COSA Advisory Teachers, COSA, Arista Supervisor NGA Director & All NGA teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Student council meetings with principal and representatives of our diverse student population provides a forum for student leadership Students in Ninth Grade Advisory classes receive the following additional supports: have “buddy” system, receive individual conferencing with Advisory teacher focusing on goal setting, time management, and stress management. Each Friday Advisory students are engaged in “Team Building” activity. "College Access" has provided for a "push-in program" (Advisory classes) that supports time-management skills, study skills and college planning. Every Advisory teacher serves as a mentor and follows up on students’ academic and social and emotional development Leadership and National Honor Society students will implement “Big Brother/Big Sister” mentoring and tutoring program, based on the needs of data provided through a parent/teacher/student survey. Students are matched to their mentor based on mentee’s academic needs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Guidance Counselors outreach Teacher contact through PupilPath Parent Coordinator Monthly Newsletter Ninth Grade Academy Monthly Newsletter Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Resources needed include: All staff members through participation in SLCs, PDs: technology required for data analysis, Skedula Grades, communications and collaboration between staff, students and families; and partnership supports.  Programming to allow teachers to meet by department, SLC or whole staff Teachers have the ability to work with colleagues within their SLC/department or tutor students during their CPT period  Communication and collaboration between staff, family and students allows for transparency, and the ability of all constituents to be on the same page with the same goal in mind. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 21st Century X C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  X Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As calculated by ATS, attendance for the W Cohort will be over 80% for YTD by January 29 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X X X X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Needs A school need: at this time 75.% of 2nd year students (earned enough credits in 10th grade to be on track for high school graduation), 10% behind in the boro (2016-2017 School Quality Guide) Across classrooms visited, teaching strategies continue to inconsistently provide multiple entry points into the curricula leading to uneven engagement in appropriately challenging tasks and uneven demonstration of higher-order thinking skills. Work products and discussions reflected uneven levels of student thinking and participation. 1.2 (PPO Visit 11/17/17 Feedback E. Lindsey) Next Steps:  Ensure that all APs have continued opportunities to norm and calibrate with the principal and TDEC so that they are able to provide teachers with actionable feedback that supports teachers’ ability to use instructional strategies that cognitively engage students, resulting in meaningful student work products.  Revise professional development plan to include further in-depth learning sessions and/or coaching that support growth in Danielson components 3b, 3c and 3d. Teachers should be strongly encouraged to create an 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  anticipatory set of higher order questions (checks for understanding) in their lesson plans and instructional objectives. Learning tasks should create opportunities for students to make their thinking observable through meaningful discourse and/or writing products. Professional learning opportunities should also include opportunities to engage in task analysis using a protocol. During a task analysis protocol, teachers should assess both the level of rigor of what students are being asked to do along with the actual resources with which students are using in the lesson. During professional learning, use a tool such as Hess’ Cognitive Rigor Matrix; it is illustrative and helps teachers to apply Webb’s Depth of Knowledge.  Provide professional learning opportunities that support teachers with becoming more adept at structuring student to student discourse via different types of discussion protocols, debate models, and/or Socratic circles School Strengths The Principal has ensured that the majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based professional collaborations that promote the achievement of school goals and the implementation of CCLS, strengthening the instructional capacity of teachers. Through different types of school teams (ICT Teams, Content Department Teams & Interdisciplinary SLC Teams), teachers have opportunities to develop professionally, take on leadership roles, and participate in decision making that affects how students learn at the school. Teams meet regularly, and teacher leaders meet weekly with the Supervisor, and monthly with the Principal. Teams support students’ social, emotional, and academic growth. The school’s administrative team has embedded common planning time within the school schedule for Content Teacher Teams to meet twice a week. This allows teachers to engage in protocols dedicated to looking at student work, unit and curriculum refinement, uniform assessment planning and assessment analysis. Teachers review units together using protocols to evaluate alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). Content team members consist of General Education teachers and ISS and ENL teachers who provide access and entry points for all types of learners. Supervisors also participate in unit reviews and provide feedback and guidance to teachers through team visits, feedback letters as well as comments on google drive. Additionally, the English as a New Language AP and the ISS AP are integral parts of our professional development committee. They provide expertise to promote and ensure that differentiated instruction is embedded in plans and implemented during lessons to address the fact that SWDs and ENLs are not making the same growth academically as our general education students. Teams are responsible for looking at data and student work using protocols and engaging in collaborative planning of lessons and curriculum. Team members also engage in providing each other with feedback. (PPO Visit Feedback 2/15/18 Leticia Pineiro) Next Steps: School leaders will monitor teacher teams and give facilitators frequent feedback to ensure that teachers are assessing work from all learners and discussions are in depth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an average 3% increase in credit accumulation in 10th grade students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The Instructional Cabinet, Lead Teachers and SLT members review, and evaluate data, plan, share and revise school academic supports to meet the targeted needs of our students. Cabinet Members Weekly Instructional Cabinet meetings Principal, APs, Lead Teachers, SLT members PD focuses on instructional strategies that provide for multiple entry points for all learners, align with a rigorous CCLS curriculum, address needs and gaps identified. All teachers On going Principal, APs, Lead Teachers Instructional Walk-through inform PD by evaluating current rigor and focusing strategies on consistent teacher practice An updated Student Handbook for SY 2018-2019 is provided to parents and students including school regulations, academic and behavioral expectation as well as individualized class contracts. Staff, families, students Beginning of the school-year APs, GCs Professional development for parents focus on school-wide academic, social, emotional concerns, include the data sources and their use, school initiatives, opportunities for student supports, the ICT classroom model and special timely events. Student Council enables students to express concerns and work with leadership to find solutions CPT includes designated days for group and individual student tutoring provided by their SLC classroom teachers SLC and Department PD meetings designate time for collaboration to improve performance, attendance and scholarship Parent Coordinator Student Council members Students recommended for tutoring ongoing Parent Coordinator, Guidance Department Monthly Principal and COSA Ongoing Ongoing Lead Teacher & SLC members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Parents and family members will be kept informed on progress of individual students through the use of progress reports at the mid point of each marking period. This will result in parents having the ability to see generated grades (aligned to the grading policy) 6 times each year. In addition the principal reminds parents through a phone message each month to monitor student progress on PupilPath. Parents are given PupilPath login lessons during Ninth Grade Parent orientations, Family Night activities and throughout the year as requested of the Parent Coordinator. This system allows parents and students to access up-to-date individual academic information. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources needed include: All staff members through participation in SLCs, PDs,: technology required for data analysis, Skedula Grades, communications and collaboration between staff, students and families Per-session will be used for after-school programs and Regents Success Support Programming to allow teachers to meet by department, SLC or whole staff Teachers have the ability to work with colleagues within their SLC/department or tutor students during their CPT period Communication and collaboration between staff, family and students allows for transparency, and the ability of all constituents to be on the same page with the same goal in mind. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The scholarship report for MP3 (February) will indicate at least 60% of 10th Grade students will be on track for earning 10+ credits. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Need: According to Advance Dashboard data (June 2018) Danielson Component 3B is Newtown's lowest rated component with a combined HE/E rating of 71.94 with a Developing rating at 26.70. ...across classrooms, teachers’ assessment practices inconsistently reflect the use of ongoing checks for understanding and student self-assessment so that teachers inconsistently make effective adjustments to meet students’ learning needs. (Danielson 3D) PPO Visit Feedback February 15 2018 Leticia Pineiro The administrative team will provide in-house professional learning for teachers on formative assessment strategies so they understand the following: What they are; why they should use them; when to use them; and how to determine which ones are appropriate to use given the context of their lesson plan and students’ learning needs. PPO Visit Feedback February 15 2018 Leticia Pineiro 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  School Strength School leaders and teacher peers support the development of teachers, including those new to the profession, with effective feedback and next steps through the strategic use of frequent cycles of classroom observation and analysis of student work/data. School leaders have an effective system that uses data from teacher observations to effectively facilitate professional development. Impact: Effective use of “norming visits” and professional learning committee and inter-visitation support serve to build an environment where teachers are adequately supervised and supported in their professional growth. School leaders have designed a system that is dynamic, adaptive and interconnected by the implementation of the school’s SLC structure that will guide the cycle of continuous improvement and action where collaboration, communication, and program structures enable revisions as needs indicate with personnel and resources. Distributive leadership is evidenced by weekly meeting of school leaders, including the cabinet members, and Lead Teachers that impact the work of the SLC teams. The SLC teams monitor student data, participate in inquiry, share best practices communicate with colleagues and families to improve the quality of student life and achievement. An extensive cadre of administrative and teacher leaders have successfully implemented six small learning communities and are focused on critical school improvement goals of increasing academic achievement, attendance, and graduation rates. Creative use of programs and human resources have resulted in many integrated and increased opportunities for students. These opportunities serve all students. Structures for formal and informal observations are in place where actionable feedback is provided to school leaders and teachers. A system to monitor and norm the quality of the feedback has been established. Our regents pass rates show a concerning trend regarding the depth of analysis that students are able to reach. in order to make gains on the Regents exams teachers will demonstrate growth in developing robust and engaging classroom questions and discussions, as measured by the Danielson Framework. As a school we will continue to strengthen teachers’ assessment practices to reflect feedback resulting in instructional adjustments and clear next learning steps to improve student outcome. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 3% increase in the HEDI rating combined effective and high effective on the Measures of Teacher Performance (MOTP) scale in NYCDOE Advance in Component 3B as compared to the previous year’s rating. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers SY 18-19 on going All AP Supervision, all teachers All teachers SY 18-19 on going All AP Supervision, all teachers All teachers SY 18-19 On going All AP Supervision, all teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Using Domain 3 as the lens during classroom observations will allow Supervisors to hold conversations with teachers on how to improve. As a team (teacher and Supervisor), the attributes found within the Danielson rubric will serve as the basis for creating a plan of action building towards the enhancement of teacher pedagogy. Supervisory staff will meet individually with teachers to review student data and together develop plans that include components of Danielson for improving student achievement. -Assistant Principals will have small group discussions with teachers about the “Look Fors & Listen Fors” in 3B In Observation Feedback teachers will receive specific recommendations for Component 3B and 3D; teachers will be directed to implement a strategy into the Lesson Plan by a specific date -Model 3B teacher for each department will be asked to open his/her classroom to colleagues 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. There will be a presentation of The Danielson Framework at a parent workshop to outline how Newtown High School is using this tool to enhance teacher practice and therefore student success. Presenters will inform parents regularly during PTA meetings about instructional programs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Parents receive progress reports informing them of students’ academic and social progression with practical strategies to implement . Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time for Professional Development Per-session and Per-diem to fund: *Presenters at the The Danielson Framework parent workshop to outline how Newtown High School is using this tool to enhance teacher practice and therefore student success. *Presenters will inform parents regularly during PTA meetings about instructional programs. *Danielson Workshops for teachers Scheduled time during the school day for conferencing & observations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1st NHS will have provided at least 2 PD sessions on Danielson. In turn there will be at a 1.5% increase of teachers being rated effective in Component 3B. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC DOE Advance Dashboard Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength As revealed in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide - Online Edition the Strong Family-Community Ties Survey Element Scores rose to 3.09, this is up from 2.74. School Need: As revealed in the 2017-18 School Quality Guide – Online Edition 58% (up from 52% 2016-2017) of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often An increase in Parent Involvement is needed: Extensive research has shown that students achieve more in school when their parents are involved in their education. A report from the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) that surveyed the same 25,000 students, once in 8th grade, again in 10th, and lastly in 12th. The students' responses—along 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  with surveys of their parents and educators, and academic data—showed that parental involvement in school correlates with higher grade point averages. https://www.childtrends.org/indicators/parental-involvement-in-schools Newtown High School staff shares the commitment to effectively communicate with all constituencies, students, families, colleagues, and partners to support the child’s academic achievement and social emotional growth. Protocols for communication between staff, students and their families are in place. Phone calls, emails, and letters document communications. PupilPath enable parents as well as students to review the latest data about their child. The Parent Coordinator provides professional development to family members as well as personally act as a liaison between family members and school personnel. They create and distribute monthly newsletters containing valuable information for families. Family involvement and engagement goes beyond sharing student’s academic and behavior information. The school communicates with parents and families using multiple mediums. Opportunities exist for parents to engage with teachers and school staff related to their child’s academic progress and social-emotional growth. More opportunities will be made to volunteer their time to support the school, discuss local and state data related to student learning and achievement. Communication with families is provided in English and Spanish consistently, and in other languages of the school community as needed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Parent Coordinator will perform outreach to parents using multiple methods resulting in an increased attendance at parent meeting (parent-teacher conferences, workshops, PTA meetings) by at least 3%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The bi-lingual Parent Coordinator supports parents with: communication including, monthly Newsletters, responding to phone calls and following-up on concerns, providing individual PD and group PD around data, grades, PupilPath, school initiatives, literacy, and CCLS among others. SLC design facilitates communication between staff and families about student academic and social emotional progress SLC planned events celebrate students’ academic, sports, and career related achievement with ceremonies where families are invited. Through the SLCs, all students are supported by teachers, Guidance Counselors, Assistant Principals equally regardless of subgroup status. SLC activities including looking at student work incorporate disaggregated data analysis, professional development to meet the needs of all students including subgroups. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Families Ongoing Parent Coordinators SLC team and family members SLC team members, students and families Ongoing SLC team members Throughout the school year Lead Teachers , Assistant Principal/SLC Directors All students Ongoing All SLC staff All SLC staff Weekly All SLC staff PupilPath makes it possible for families to acquire the latest information about their child’s progress and communicate with the teachers. Students and families Communication between staff and families around student progress is an integral part of the SLC structure design. Families engage in phone calls and emails, and use PupilPath to improve student outcomes, All staff and families Ongoing Assistant Principals Daily Assistant Principals SLC Lead Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Queens Community House Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources needed include: All staff members through participation in SLCs, PDs: technology required for data analysis, PupilPath, communications and collaboration between staff, students and families; CBOs and partnership supports. Resources needed include: All staff members through participation in SLCs, PDs,: technology required for data analysis, Skedula Grades, communications and collaboration between staff, students and families Per-session will be used for after-school programs and Regents Success Support Programming to allow teachers to meet by department, SLC or whole staff Teachers have the ability to work with colleagues within their SLC/department or tutor students during their CPT period. Communication and collaboration between staff, family and students allows for transparency, and the ability of all constituents to be on the same page with the same goal in mind. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, attendance at Parent Meetings will increase by 1.5% as compared to the 2017-2018 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets held by the PC Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 8th grade ELA exam scores of levels 1 & 2 ELA Regents exam scores below 65 When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Services are provided Monday – Friday, during school and Monday-Thursday after-school Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ● Small group instruction ● Collaborative Team Teaching ● Tutoring Regents Prep sessions Extended Day classes Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Incoming 9th graders, who have received scores of levels 1&2 on the 8th grade ELA exam, are placed in two English classes. The second is a writing class with a focus on strengthening writing skills to better support struggling 9th grade students.Tutoring classes are provided after-school on Monday – Thursday. Integrated Co-Teaching :ELA & ESL collaborative team teaching classes provide instruction to students in English classes to support students at grade level, on levels 1 & 2, and SWDs. Saturday Academy: Small group instruction provided to students who need extra support in ESL classes. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41 ●Small group instruction ● Integrated Co- Teaching Services are provided Monday – Friday, during school and Monday-Thursday after-school and Saturday mornings ● Tutoring ● Regents Prep in Extended Day Classes Mathematics 9 th grader; students with IEPs; math proficiency levels are 1 and 2; ESL students who have not passed the NYSSELAT; students who have not passed a math class; students who have not passed a math Regents exam Summer School : Students who did not pass the Regents are allowed to make up the course while preparing for the August Regents administration. Tutoring classes are provided for two hours afterschool on Monday – Thursday. Integrated Co-Teaching : 15 collaborative team teaching classes provide instruction to students in Common Core Algebra 1 and Algebra II classes to support students at grade level, on levels 1 & 2, and SWDs. Bilingual Spanish : Algebra 1, Intermediate Algebra, Geometry, and Algebra 2/Trigonometry classes offered additionally in Spanish to ELLs who have not yet passed the NYSSELAT Extended Day Provision classes: Classes offered in English and Spanish to students as an extra math class to support students in developing proficiency in Algebra for success in the day program and on Regents exams. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42 Small group -tutoring After school tutoring Saturday School tutoring SLC tutoring during school – The SLC tutoring is usually one – to one or very small groups Large Group -tutoring One – to – one tutoring Edmodo Learning Pal Science Students who have not scored a 65 on the Living Environment regents Students who are not on target for credit accumulation in Science Saturday Academy : Small group instruction, in English and Spanish, is provided to students who need extra support for Regents courses – Common Core Algebra 1, Common Core. Integrated Co-Teaching: 19 collaborative team teaching classes provide instruction to students in Science classes to support students at grade level, on levels 1 & 2, and SWDs. Rigorous Regents preparation which includes repeated readings to cite evidence from text, hands on experiences for labs, interactive use of the SMART Board to make the learning more permanent in terms of visuals. Emphasis on writing. After School Lab Makeup. Students are given the opportunity to make up any missed or incomplete Lab so that they are eligible to take the Regents Examination. These make up labs are offered Tuesdays and Thursdays from 3:30 PM to 5:30 PM as 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Social Studies 8th grade ELA exam scores of levels 1 & 2 Students who have not scored a 65 on the Global and US History regents Students who are not on target for credit accumulation in the Social Studies subject area well as on Saturdays 9 to 12 noon. Saturday Academy Students are given the opportunity on Saturdays as well to develop and master the requisite skills needed to pass the Regents Examination. Saturday instruction is usually done in small groups which make it easier for teachers to be more accessible to the students. Summer School Students who fail the Regents in June are given the opportunity to retake the Regents in August. Integrated Co-Teaching : 16 collaborative team teaching classes provide instruction to classes taught by two teachers Saturday Academy : Small group instruction is provided in Saturday academies to support students taking standardized Regents exams in Global History and US History and Government. Includes both credit bearing courses and Regents prep courses for Global History and Lunch Tutoring during the day, before and after school and weekend Small group instruction Team Teaching tutoring, small group & one-on-one Regents Prep seminars, Auditing Regents classes Provisional Social Studies classes. Supplemental Extended Day Classes 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students identified by Pupil Personnel Team, SLC Teacher teams, Social Workers, Guidance Counselors, Deans, and by parental request. In addition, a student with excessive absence or cutting. US History Regents exams. Summer School : Identified by a failure to meet course standards and/or pass Regents exams. Provides an opportunity for students to make up credits. Reduced student-teacher ratio enables small group and individualized instruction based on assessed needs. Affords at-risk students, identified by cohort data, the opportunity to re-take Regents exams Individual and Group Counseling; Specific Topics assigned to each guidance counselor, social worker and Spark counselor to help students with their social and emotional problems. Guidance staff involvement in the EWI functions in all SLCs Spark Counseling ; Peer Helpers; Peer Mentoring program led by guidance staff The service is provided during the day, before and after school. Individual counseling Small Group counseling Family counseling sessions Provide information about on- going tutoring services provided by subject class departments and SLCs Constantly encourage and check on students to attend tutoring during the day and Extended Day classes 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Provide Regents Review information on Websites and in the library EWI and Champion Services to help students with Academic, Behavior and Attendance problems Mentoring programs in SLCs and the guidance department to help at risk students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Newtown High School currently has 20 students that are in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our Guidance Staff provides additional services for STH. They know which students are in temporary housing and they meet with these students on an ongoing basis. Each counselor does his best to make the student feel welcome at Newtown and helps the student to navigate the services available in the building. If needed, outside referrals are made. The counselor makes contact with the parent and builds a working relationship so that we can serve the student. Students in Temporary Housing are encouraged to take advantage of our clubs and teams as well as the tutoring available after school. In addition to these services, students in temporary housing receive toiletries, stationary (notebooks, binders, pens, pencils) flash drives, coats, sweaters, shirts. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Prior to hiring candidates, teacher's credentials are verified by our Network’s Human Resources Director to ensure that the candidate holds a valid NYS certification in that license area. The BEDS survey is reviewed by the Principal and the HR Director who work with our school to ensure that every teacher’s assignment aligns with their license area so that all teachers are reported as Highly Qualified on the BEDS Survey. Strategies and activities used to attract high-qualified teachers to our school include: Frequent communication with our Network HR Director when vacancies occur. Central Office of Talent and Recruitment partners with colleges and the Network HR Director partners with Central for assistance and guidance and for candidate referrals. Participating in Central Hiring Fair events where pre-screened HQT candidates are interviewed and recruited. Establishing a partnership with a local college to support the grooming of student teachers in our search of HQT candidates. Interviewing HQT candidates from The Open Market Hiring System and The Absent Teacher Reserve (ATR) Pool. Establishing a rigorous interview protocol that includes intensive criteria for the selection of new staff members including demonstration lessons, interviews, and New York State certification/licensing. Maintaining a teacher resource center and professional library to promote promising and effective practices. Teachers will be provided with curriculum maps, instructional resources and professional learning opportunities. Individualized PD plans are created for teachers to ensure continued improvement. In the very rare event, if a teacher’s status was deemed not HQT, the principal would consult with the network HR Director for guidance to ensure that the non-HQT teacher will meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. This may include some form of counseling, including encouraging the teacher to become HQT through the High Objective Uniform State Standard of Evaluation (HOUSSE) system. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All department supervisors provide ongoing professional development on the Common Core State Standards. Teachers are trained in strategies and techniques to help them implement Common Core State Standards into all of their lessons. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49   Teams of teachers collaborate to revise curricula, implement instructional strategies that engage students in learning rigorous college and career ready skilled curricula during  Curriculum teams in core subjects meet weekly to ensure alignment with Engage NY curriculum and implementation of New Visions curriculum in Science and Social Studies.  A Professional development school-wide plan built by a team of teachers and administration. This structure is supported in SLC by Lead Teachers during PD sessions, as well as through classroom inter-visitations  ESL and ISS teachers collaborative plan with their content area colleagues and provide push-in supports and   strategies. ISS co-teacher s attend weekly PD sessions with their content area colleagues Families have access to PupilPath which allows then to monitor their child’s progress in every daily subject and communicate through this system via email. Families are provided professional development around CCLS, PupilPath and Danielson Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers create tasks and assessments that are Common Core aligned. They create the assessments with professional development support. Creating and examining the assessments allows teachers to shift practice based on the data. Additionally, the department teams meet twice a week to maintain common assessment materials. Department teams analyze assessment results to plan for methods of improvement. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 952,309 16,979 248.493 N/A 57,422 N/A 11,428,083 x x x N/A X N/A x Column B Section Reference(s) 5a 5b 5c 5d 5e 5a 5b 5c 5d 5e 5a 5b 5c 5d 5e N/A 5a 5b 5c 5d 5e N/A 5a 5b 5c 5d 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Newtown High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Newtown High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: I: Supplemental Program- After School & Saturday Academy Newtown's Title III Program provides extra help and enrichment opportunities in the form of direct supplemental programming Mondays through Fridays after school and Saturdays for grades 9-12. A. After School - 1. Sub- Group - Long Terms ELLs (LTEs) and Middle of the Year ELLs According to our June 2018 EDAT , Newtown High School has 52 Long Terms Ells . We encourage our LTEs to attend Achieve 3000 class twice a week for two hours . Our class size range from 15- to 20 ELLs. Achieve 3000 supports students in reading and analyzing all sorts of texts across content areas with a critical-thinking lens. Every student in class reads the same grade-appropriate content differentiated at their individual reading level, empowering all students to fully participate in whole-class instruction and discussions. With deeply differentiated instruction, scaffolds, and linguistic supports struggling ELL readers are provided with ongoing supports. 2. Sub- Group - SIFE - Four days a week for 2 hrs Newtown's SIFE Program for ELLs meets 4 days a week Monday through Thursday for 2 hours each day. According to EDAT, we have made some progress with our low literacy SIFE ELLs keeping this in mind Newtown High School continues to use "Bridges Success Academy " classes for our 21 SIFE ELLs. . The dual certified ENL/ELA and NLA teacher will use Bridges Strategies and literacy skills in English and in students home language. B. Saturday Academy Saturday Instructional Academy classes offer classes for under credited and Long Terms ELLs in for the following classes: · &nbsp;CC English Regents · Global and U.S. History Saturday Instructional Academy will meet meet a total of 28 sessions beginning October 2018 through May 2019, from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. The two classes above will service around 40 Entering , Emerging , LTELLs, Middle of the Year, and SWDs ELLs. Instruction will focus on implementing ENL scaffolding and SIOP strategies as well as content related information to all ELLs to achieve higher scores on Regents exams. Teachers will use a variety of texts and supplementary resources as well as taking attendance daily and copies of the sheets will be given to the A.P.S who will then keep attendance sheets on file or digital. The Saturday Academy teachers are as follows: 1 certified ENL Teacher and 2 certified Bilingual SS teachers. . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: II. Professional Development In 2018- 2019 school year, Newtown’s Professional Learning (PL) program will focus on providing teachers of various subject around the following areas : planning and preparation instruction and the classroom environment. Teachers will engage in a in collaborative practice the will improve student outcomes. ENL and Content teachers will put into practice the use of multiple teaching strategies for ELL students. Professional Learning will be facilitated by school administrators, ENL and Content teachers. Facilitators have and will continue to attend Queens Borough North PLCs in order to turn key information in PLs. Professional Learning will take place once a month for 2 hours and 15 minutes . Within the 2 hours and 15 minutes, teachers will engage in collaborative conversation with their colleagues developing the strategies learned in each session. All PLs will have a sign in sheets, activities and agenda. All documentation will be kept online via Google Docs. Topics for Teachers 1. Formative Assessment Strategies 2. Socratic Seminars for all learners 3. Academic Language 4. Cognitive Engagement 5. High Expectations rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: III. Parental Engagement A. Parent Classes Newtown’s Title III program will provide parents of ELLs opportunities to learn English. Saturday Instructional Academy gives parents the opportunity for parents to attend 15 sessions. Parents learn ESL skills preparation taught by fully certified ENL teacher . Translation is available for parents who attend English class through the use of 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities dictionaries. Saturday ENL classes for Parents classes are from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. from October 2016 through June 2017. B. Parent Workshops Parent workshops for ELLs take place at least 3 times a year and are planned in areas such as Orientation for the NYC school system, Curriculum Night , NYSESLAT and familiarizing parent with state exams, Common Core Learning Standards, and using Pupilpath . Pamplets and/or are translated in their preferred language. During these workshops as refreshments will be purchased and served. These workshops will be given by our Small Learning Community teachers who are certified in bilingual and ENL instruction. Parents will be notified through our telephone messenger in various languages . Invitations in their preferred language will be disseminated via pupil path, mail, robo call or distributed to the students in class. Attendance will be taken by the facilitators and all records will be online via Google Docs. Parents also take part in Parent Association meetings held the third Thursday of each month. Workshops and seminars for parents of ELLs include: • New to the NYC School System • Pupilpath Training • State Exams- ( NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and Regents ) • Curriculum Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. 3. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 4. Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name Newtown High School Borough Queens School Number 455 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal John Ficalora Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Shara Berkowitz Teacher/Subject Area Alexandra Martinez Teacher/Subject Area Meny Beriro Related-Service Provider John Clifford Superintendent Elaine Lindsey Assistant Principal Charlene Nieves Coach N/A School Counselor Marcia Aguancha Parent Blanca Jimenez Parent Coordinator Gisela Zapata Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 2 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 3 9 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1977 Total number of ELLs 436 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 22.05% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish & Chinese If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 4 3 2 1975 1975 Lang. SP. CH. Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 101 5 106 10 71 12 11 76 8 12 50 20 83 84 70 Tot # 298 45 0 0 0 0 343 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? . Newtown High School administers the NYSITELL and Spanish LAB-R to incoming students who are new or re-entry to the New York City School System. Through our oral interview, a decision is made to have students take the MLS in order to designate as SIFE. Based on the data from the MLS, students are placed in a sheltered SIFE program. For students who have been in the system, we examine previous NYSITELL, Spanish LAB, NYSESLAT, ELA, and English Regents scores, as well as initial diagnostic writing samples taken in all level classes. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  We use several forms of assessment data to guide our instructional planning for ELLs. The data we use has two purposes: 1) to increase student achievement on the Regents exams, and 2) to prepare students for college and career through alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards. This is evidenced through work in department teams and our Interdisciplinary teams. Alignment of assessments to curricula · ENL teams provide feedback on curriculum to ensure assessments are aligned to the Common Core Standards.. Across the departments, assessment calendar, uniform assessments that are aligned to the curriculum are administered. Using assessment data to adjust curricula and instruction · Teacher Teams focus around in-class department uniform assessment analysis, teacher team created assessments, and Regents data to identify areas of strength and develop common strategies to address weaknesses. Teams collaborate to create curricula and assessments across courses. In addition, teams examine student work in order to create a more in-depth, cohesive action plan. · All assessment data including writing assessments for ELLs will be used to determine appropriate strategies as a next step for students. Use of ongoing checks for understanding and student self-assessment. · We are using a variety of assessment for learning techniques including: exit slips, cold call and parking lot. In addition, to building teachers’ rituals to include these strategies, we’re deepening our use to inform the next day’s instruction and lesson plan. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Newtown High school dedicates time for all teachers to have common planning embedded into their school day. Through our different types of school teams, ICT Teams, Content Department Teams & Interdisciplinary Small Learning Community Teams. ENL teacher teams create assessments, tasks, rubrics, protocols and curricular adaptations and extensions for all ELL students. Across departments and Small learning community resources will be shared on Google Drive. Teachers take part in two content team meetings per week in order to allow for vertical and horizontal alignment, to ensure alignment with all curricula . The International SLC meets the needs of our ELL population by including all bilingual and teachers of ELLs across grades and disciplines. This SLC meets three days a week to discuss and share best pedagogical approaches, instructional materials and resources that are appropriate to the learning needs of ELL students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We have a great deal of summative, standardized-test-data with which to evaluate the success of our ENL program. We specifically look for movement on the NYSESLAT from Entering through Commanding, an increase in the percentage Transitioning and expanding students passing the CC English Regents Exam, and some improvement in the percentage of ELLs passing other content area classes and Regents exams, and our ELL graduation rate. Newtown High School will engage in several progress-monitoring cycles. All regents bound classes take a baseline and end of year Performance Task. Uniform summative exams are given every marking period and analyzed in order for modifications to be made to curriculum. There is a need to improve our preparation of ELLs for the Regents exams required for graduation: ELA, Algebra, Global History, US History, and Living Environment. Because these exams have high literacy demands, these results align with the NYSESLAT data which shows that our students need to continue to develop their reading and writing skills. Instructional strategies and materials provide access to academic content areas and accelerated English language development to ELLs. Content area teachers are provided with grade level appropriate supports such as content materials written specifically for ELLs. Our school's ELLs struggle to meet AYP as the math and ELA regents data show. The school provides extensive tutoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  to try to improve students' results. The ENL department utilize the DDC Portal in Skedula to analyze both Regents results and summative assessments. The system in place for providing students with feedback is multifaceted as well. In-class components include a variety of formative and summative assessment tools, use of rubrics and next steps. A baseline assessment is given to all ELLs taking the CC ELA Regents. According to the baseline assessments in January, students still struggle with the task analysis writing of the ELA CC. Keeping this in mind , ENL teachers model in-class assessments after high stakes tasks like Regents exams. We’re also focused on refining our assessments . The ENL teachers continue to look at student work in order to improve teacher practice thus increasing ELA CC scores. Based on the EDAT and results from content regents, the school took part in SIOP training in January 2017. This new instructional initiative will focus on ELL instruction in the content areas. The SIOP Model emphasizes the importance of language development across the curriculum, as well as providing ample opportunity for students to practice reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills. Administration has created a bilingual and ENL supervisory team to conduct walk throughs looking for the implementation of the SIOP components . All content ELL and Bilingual teachers have received intensive professional development training in using the SIOP model in the 2015-2016 school year and will be revisited in the 2017- 2018 school year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the data is gathered , teachers work in their teacher teams and complete an assessment analysislooking forstrengths and weakness in order to revise curriculum and adjust instruction. Newtown also provides before , during and after school tutoring develop skills in order to pass Regents exams. For example, Newtown is implementing lunch and learn and breakfast buddies where students are provided lunch and/or breakfast and receive help in all content areas. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At Risk ELLs 9-12 - Newtown offers after school and Saturday classes for students who are at risk. Students are scheduled twice a week to take part in Achieve 3000 which is Web-based, individualized reading and writing instruction that reaches every student at his or her Lexile level. Achieve 3000 tailors reading ans writing instruction according to each student's reading level. Teachers customize content and monitor student progress over time . Students also receive extra support while attending Newtown's Saturday Academy. At- Risk students take classes History , Science and English. Newtown also offers Global and U.S History during the day for 45 minutes for students who are at risk. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The ELL Data Analysis Tool provides the school with a snapshot of what can be done to meet students’ academic needs. The school can then make informed instructional decisions that positively affect students performance. Based on the data and the CR PART 154 regulations, students are programed according based on their NYSESLAT/NYSITELL level. Data from the four modalities are used to adjust instruction in all ENL classes. Based on students’ Regents data, ELL students are programmed for extended day and Saturday school. Teachers use the data to decide on grouping and differentiation. Newtown High School provides ENL classes for Long Term ELL ISS students with a focus on Global and U.S history. Low leveled SIFE students will continue to have have a sheltered 9th grade program with a focus on using the CUNY 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Bridges curriculum for ELA Part 1 and 2. Content teachers of SIFE students will use “Bridges “ strategies. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our small learning community meet three times a week .One day is devoted to professional development.During this time,the lead teacher reports the finding of the EDAT.Teachers work together to provide areas of focus based on the students“At Risk levels” and NYSESLAT scores.Newtown High School instituted two opportunities for academicintervention:Lunch and Learn andBreakfast Buddies.Students attend either morning or afternoon sessions and receive tutoring and a bite to eat. Students all participate in Newtown’s Saturday Academy and after school tutoring. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All ELLs receive instruction in English regardless of whether they follow Freestanding ESL or TBE. New York State Commissioner's Regulations Part 154 determines how many units of ENL instruction each student should receive according to his/her proficiency level from the NYSESLAT score or according to the NYSITELL score. Entering ELLs receive 540 minutes per week according to the CR-Part 154. These ELLs are in a double period ENL class taught by an ENL teacher. The third unit is taught by a dual licensed ELA/ENL teacher. Emerging ELLs receive one period of stand alone ENL and one period of ELA/ ENL taught by a dual licensed teacher. Transitioning and expanding ELLs receive one period of integrated ELA instruction taught by an ENL teacher and ELA teacher. The commanding ELLs receive 1 unit of ENL through Social Studies taught by a dual certified Social Studies/ENL teacher. Both CR- PART 154 ENL and TBE was provided with support in the ELA classroom and each English proficiency level class is divided as such: 9th and 10th graders are grouped together and 11th and 12th graders are grouped together. b. TBE program. If applicable. All ELLs receive instruction in English regardless of whether they follow Freestanding ESL or TBE. New York State Commissioner's Regulations Part 154 determines how many units of ENL instruction each student should receivevaccording to his/her proficiency level from the NYSESLAT score or according to the NYSITELL score. Entering ELLs receive 540 minutes per week according to the CR-Part 154. These ELLs are in a double period stand alone ENL class taught by an ENL teacher. The third unit is integrated ENL/ELA taught by a dual licensed ELA/ENL teacher. Emerging ELLs receive one period of stand alone ENL and one period of integrated ENL/ELA taught by a dual licensed teacher. Transitioning and expanding ELLs receive one period of integrated ELA instruction taught by an ENL teacher and ELA teacher. For each level of ENL, 9th and 10th graders are grouped together and 11th and 12th graders are grouped together. The commanding ELLs receive 1 unit of ENL in the content area of Social Studies taught by a dual certified Social Studies/ENL teacher OR an integrated English class taught by a dual licensed ELA/ENL teacher. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Spanish TBE classes include Global Studies, U.S. History, Algebra, Living Environment and Earth Science. Entering and Emerging students take a minimum of 2 TBE classes and transitioning and expanding students take a minimum of 1 TBE class. All classes are taught by certified bilingual content area teachers with a bilingual extension. Every Spanish speaking ELL also takes one period of Home Language Arts taught by a certified Language Other Than English teacher. Both CR- Part 154 ENL and TBE are provided with support in the ELA classroom. All ENL classes are scheduled using STARS. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The goals of Newtown’s Bilingual program are as follows: · Provide instruction in two languages: the language spoken at home and English. In the beginning/entering stages of English language development, 75 percent of instructional time will take place in the student’s native language and 25 percent in English. Emerging students 40 % English and 60 % Home Language, Transitioning ELLs 50/50 and Advanced ELLs 75 % English and 25 % Home Language. As the students develop fluency in English, instructional time in English increases. The goals of a freestanding ENL program in the content areas are as follows: Infuse ESL strategies into content instruction so that students can learn content and receive content credit while simultaneously developing English skills. Using ESL methodology and instructional strategies. Using native language support to make content comprehensible. In our ENL Content and Home Language classes focus on ELL instruction in the content areas using the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol. The SIOP Model emphasizes the importance of language development across the curriculum, as well as providing ample opportunity for students to practice reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills . Teachers will continue to provide grade-level academic work in the student’s native language so that the student maintains academic progress while developing English proficiency in order to provide ensure equity and academic growth for ELL students. ELL Content and Home Language teachers use scaffolding techniques to make content more comprehensible to enrich language development. The SIOP Model will guide programmatic and curricular decisions for ELLs until they acquire proficiency. These strategies will be implemented to ensure uniformity as well as consistency in the delivery of instruction to ELLs. Every program model follows a curriculum that specifically addresses the CCLS. Unit maps and pacing calendars outline specific tasks, strategies, and projects that are aligned to the common core. In order for each English Language Learner (ELL) to meet the high standards set for all students. Freestanding ENL Content Area teachers use dictionaries to ensure students are developing their vocabulary. Teachers also pair students by language or according their NYSESLAT results. Students are grouped heterogeneously so that their peers can help each other. Content teachers meet the demands of the Common Core by asking text based questions where students provide evidence. Spanish Home Language classes include Global Studies, U.S. History, Algebra , Living Environment and Earth Science and Chinese TBE classes include Living Environment , Global Studies and U.S. and Algebra. As the school year progresses, English is used more in classroom instruction. Textbooks are in students' home language and English. Support 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  materials such as classroom library books and dictionaries are provided in both languages. PD is provided for the teachers in best practices for ELLs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Diagnostic assessments for Native Language include the Spanish Lab and CRT (Chinese Reading Test ) For Home Language programs, we have bilingual teachers who perform oral and written assessments. Home Language teacher test students using Independent Reading Level Assessment Framework (ENIL) . This assessment gives an accurate reading level for each student in their home language. Students speaking other languages are evaluated by NY State teachers who are certified in TESOL . 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE: Newtown High School has created a sheltered SIFE 9th class. Student who participated in this program are tested having low literacy based on the MLS. This program addressed the needs of our SIFE population. A team of bilingual content area teachers work collaboratively with ENL instructors to implement a cohesive interdisciplinary curricula adapted to the needs of SIFE students. ENL teachers are trained using the “Bridges” Curriculum and turn key all strategies to content area teachers. SIFE students have a double period class and a single ELA that concentrates solely on using ELA PArt 1 and Part 2. Bridges provides academic preparation and low levels of home language literacy and prepares SIFE students with foundational language and literacy skills and background content knowledge they will need to succeed. SIFE after school for our 10th , 11, and 12th graders continues to provide support in literary and academics in order to have positive student outcomes. If the student is SIFE according to the MLS and is an incoming ninth grader, he is placed in the new self contained SIFE program. The SIFE team meets twice a week to discuss progress, look at student work, and plan lessons. Teachers who have students with interrupted education differentiate in class accordingly. Such strategies include use of visuals, graphic organizers and read alouds, peer mentoring in groups, and monthly assessments to monitor the acquisition of academic language. Tutoring is available 2 times a week before school and once a week after school for homework help and practice in reading and writing English. Teachers send a letter home encouraging these students to attend and provide materials to supplement the weekly topics covered in class. Newcomers: Title III funding provides after school tutoring and Saturday Academic tutoring. SIOP and scaffolding strategies are utilized in ENL classes and content area instruction are implemented into each lesson. Strategies include tiered assignments, use of ipads in the classroom, use of resources from the school library, regents preparation and extra review, leveled texts, use of bilingual dictionaries and visuals in the classrooms, individual small group tutoring, conferencing with teachers, notetaking skills, journal writing, and argumentative writing based on informational texts. The data used is as follows: State exams, evidence portfolios, teacher observations, and uniform departmental tests, which are analyzed on a quarterly basis in order to identify student strengths and weakness in the four modalities. In addition, small learning communities meet on a regular basis in order to analyze student work and collaborate on best practices to address deficiencies. Developing ELLs: The school plan for Developing ELLs is to provide specific support in the areas where they need the most help. We prepare 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  students for the NYSESLAT, Regents, graduation and to be college and career ready. The curricula is designed to provide students with the academic skills needed to succeed in all these areas in language that are appropriate to their current language proficiency. They gain additional practice in working with Achieve 3000, a differentiated reading program. These students analyze literature, use elements of the writing process, analyze, synthesize, and evaluate information. Students' vocabulary is enriched in classes in the content areas and students are taught to develop their writing in order to gain fluency. Genres of writing include: argumentative, informational, and literary analysis. Long Term ELLs: The plan for Long term ELLs is provide students with tools to gain fluency and academic proficiency. Students are held accountable to the same standards as mainstreamed students. However, first we need to assess in which areas students are deficient in order to provide appropriate support. Teachers provide authentic listening and reading materials such as newspapers, magazines, and radio programs on current issues. Students are guided to use academic language in highly effective classroom discussions and in their writing. Students are encouraged to take the opportunity to pass the NYSESLAT each May. They are prepared with exemplars and are taught the skills of the NYSESLAT. Achieve 3000 is implemented as an opportunity to gain proficiency. LTELLs students are programmed in an extra ENL / SS class where they receive extra support in order for them to progress in the NYSESLAT. Former ELLs: The plan for former ELLs is to provide them with all mandated services, including time extension on exams and the use of bilingual dictionaries and/or glossaries in their classes and on state exams. Tutoring is also provided to ensure they are given the support needed to pass their classes. In addition, former ELLs who only need a few credits are given the opportunity to attend extended day classes to fulfill graduation requirements. The students continue to receive support after exiting the ELL program. A dual certified ENL/Social Studies teacher provides support in history class every day for 45 minutes. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENL classes with SWDs are content based classes that employ a wide variety of authentic materials in science, social studies, and literature that reinforce vocabulary and concepts taught in their content area classes. All instructors of Ells, in both ENL and content area classes, use scaffolding, visuals, bilingual materials, where applicable, and differentiated instruction in order to provide ELL-SWDs the support they need to accelerate to the best of their abilities. According to their IEPs, they are provided with a paraprofessional to meet their needs. SWDs receive support by a dual certified ENL/Social Studies teacher and a ISS teacher who team teach in the ICT model every day for 45 minutes. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL SWDs are enrolled in ICT classes. This ensure language and content instruction are delivered according to ISS mandates and language proficiency levels. In addition, teachers provide adapted materials and scaffolds in order to ensure students can attain their IEPs goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs targeted for intervention are offered before and after school and in the Saturday Academy for ELLs in all subgroups (SIFE, ELLs- SWDs, etc.) in ELA, Math, Global, U.S. History, Living Environment, Earth Science, and Chemistry. Glossaries and bilingual dictionaries are available. ENL /ELA teacher utilizes Achieve 3000 for SWDs, long term ELLs, and ELLs taking the ELA Regents. In addition, using the EDAT the International Pioneers learning community has identified struggling students and created action plans to address their individual needs. These students will have mentors who will meet with them regularly and assist them with all their problem areas. EWI (Early Warning Intervention) has been 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  implemented weekly to identify students at risk of failing different classes. Teachers will follow up in each case immediately to assist these students and get them back on track. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the 2017-2018 school year Newtown High School will participate in the Bridges to Success Academy which is funded by NYCDOE and NYSED. Bridges will provide extra support by providing a program to accelerate language, literacy and content area learning. They will support curricula and professional development for instructors on a monthly basis and provide guidance for our ELA part 1 and Part 2 teachers. This upcoming school year, we will continue our sheltered SIFE program in all core subjects and the arts for students who are struggling academically, socially, and behaviorally. These students have been identified as lacking literacy and academic skills. The program is carefully designed to assist them in academic growth. Funding is provided for after school literacy classes and Saturday Academy. Teachers who have students with interrupted education differentiate in class accordingly. Such strategies include use of visuals, graphic organizers and read alouds, peer mentoring in groups, and monthly assessments to monitor the acquisition of academic language. Tutoring is available 2 times a week before school and once a week after school for homework help and practice in reading and writing English. Teachers send a letter home encouraging these students to attend and provide materials to supplement the weekly topics covered in class. If the student is a SIFE student according to the MLS and is an incoming ninth grader, he or she will be placed in the new self contained SIFE program. This includes U.S. history, living environment, 3 periods of ENL, common core algebra, and NLA. The SIFE team created interdisciplinary curricula to better support the students and help them meet their needs. They meet twice a week to discuss progress, look at student work, and plan lessons. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The school provides opportunities for ELLs to take College Now classes through Laguardia Community College, AP classes, elective classes in the arts, technology, business, and advanced courses in Native Language Arts. ELLs are included in school teams and clubs. Many ELLs are a part of the Drama Club, Spanish Drama Club, Photography Club, Hiking Club, Robotics Team, Chorus, Guitar Performing group, Key Club, Arista, Chess Club, School Leadership, Chinese Club, Filipino Club, Mu Alpha Theta, and Yearbook Staff. While more proficient students take advantage of free SAT prep during the summer, our students are offered a college prep program right here in Newtown. Our Summer Exploration Program introduces students to NYC history and sites, navigation of the U.S. university system, and resume and college essay writing. ENL teachers announce school events in class. Invitations for events like the Thanksgiving Multicultural Dinner Dance are provided in different languages. ELLs participate in a performance of their own culture and brings foods from their culture. The COSA gets to know the ELLs and they are included in all school activity. ELLs are their parents get free tutoring on Saturday. ELLs also attend City Year after school tutoring. All sports teams are opened to ELLs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The school continues to use Achieve3000 which is a differentiated on-line reading program in several classes as well as in extended day credited classes. This program provides differentiated texts in the major content levels based on student lexile reading level. Teachers receive training on how to use its resources in the classroom and students are encouraged to use the program in their free time at home. The school also has several licenses for educational websites including Discovery Education and World Book Online. Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  are provided with passwords to implement the resources in their lessons. Smartboards and Laptops are used as an additional support in the class. Interactive Smartboard activities are included in every lesson for tactiles learners. In addition, we have purchased a great deal of content based readers at various lexile levels that have been written into the curricula so that concepts and vocabulary that are learned in content area classes are reinforced in all ENL classes. The ENL department has over 100 iPADs that are continuously used in all ENL classes for research purposes. Depending on the population of the sheltered English content courses, additional home language materials, such as classroom libraries and bilingual textbooks, are available. In the TBE program, Spanish and Chinese language texts are provided on a number of reading levels. There bilingual language materials including bilingual dictionaries in all languages. Entering students use simple bilingual dictionaries . Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding students preparing the Regents Exam in English are provided with comprehensive bilingual dictionaries. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The goal of Newtown’s Bilingual program are as follows: To provide instruction in two languages: the language spoken at home and English. In the entering stages of English language development, 75 percent of instructional time will take place in the student’s native language and 25 percent in English. Emerging students 40 % English and 60 % Home Language, Transitioning ELLs 50/50 and Expanding ELLs 75 % English and 25 % Home Language. As the students develop fluency in English, instructional time in English increases. Formative assessment. We use several forms of assessment data to inform our decisions in our classroom. The data we use has two purposes: 1) to increase student achievement on the Regents exams, and 2) to prepare students for college and career through alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards. This is evidenced through our work in department teams and our selection of the Summative assessments.. We are using a variety of assessment for learning techniques including: exit slips, cold call and parking lot. In addition, to building teachers’ rituals to include these strategies, we’re deepening our use to inform the next day’s instruction and lesson plan. TBE Teachers focus around in-class department uniform assessment analysis, teacher team created assessments, and Regents data to identify areas of strength and develop common strategies to address weaknesses. Teams collaborate to create curricula and assessments across courses. In addition, teams examine student work in order to create a more in-depth, cohesive action plan. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELLs are placed according to their age, grade level and English proficiency level. Our Chinese and Spanish bilingual programs offer content area instruction that is both age and grade appropriate. Students who are older and/or in a higher grade, but who still have limited English proficiency, are provided with extra ENL instruction, tutoring, after school and Saturday instruction that help prepare them to pass all Regents exams and graduate in a timely manner. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? International High School of Health Sciences is co-located with Newtown High School. Both schools share the gym, weight room , library and lunch room. In the Summer, Newtown High School accepts students from International in Newtown Summer Enrichment Program. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). First, we have a well trained staff (Teachers and Counselors ) to greet new students to the school and help them and their parents navigate the registration process. Parent are then invited to attend an orientation video presented in their home language. Next, The Leadership Academy conducts new student orientation scheduled during the last week of August. ELLs and mainstream students attend a three hour session during this week to review Newtown’s rules, regulations, and a model schedule. Students become acquainted with building’s rules and regulations and tour the school. Counselors and teachers are introduced and address students. Student Guides are distributed. Counselors train students who have been in the school for a few years to mentor new arrivals. The peer mentors meet with the mentees twice a week and help them with their classes and any other questions they have regarding the school. In August, 9 th grade students are scheduled to attend Freshman Orientation to introduce new students to the building, the staff, and support programs available, as well as providing lessons on note taking skills and academic expectations. The 9th grade academy offers students behavioral supports and provides explicit lessons on the transition to high school through their Freshman Advisory class. New ELLs who enroll throughout the school year are provided with workshops by teachers in our Small Learning Community. They are held in October and February. They discuss school structure, rules and procedures, where to go for help, how to succeed in school, and study skills. The bilingual counselors talked the them about credits and classes and regents requirements. New ELLs are also invited to attend Parent meetings solely for ELLs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs have opportunities to enroll in College credit bearing programs through Queensborough Community College and/or elective in Spanish, Chinese and French literature courses. The Foreign Language Department offers a Spanish Drama Class for NLA students and AP Spanish and Chinese. In addition, the Foreign Language Department holds a Poetry Recitation Contest in Spanish and Chinese, among other languages in the month of April. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is implemented for all teachers of ELLs during common planning time and after school. Bilingual Social Studies, Science , Math and ENL Content teachers participate in PDs once a week, focusing on specific topics such as Implementing Common Core in all ENL classes, Academic Language, Close Reading, SIOP and Bridges Strategies, Checks for Understanding , Socratic Seminar for ELLs, Questioning and Strategies for ELL teachers. Some other topics include citing evidence, infusion of grade level texts, argumentative writing strategies, and rigor in the classroom. Each Professional development session is designed to engage the participants in practical strategies that can be implemented in their classroom, as well as widen their knowledge in pedagogy. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional Development workshops for staff working with ELLs are ongoing throughout the 2017-2016 school year. These workshops ensure the receipt of the appropriate PD hours for new and current ENL and Bilingual teachers (15% for all teachers and 50% for teachers of ELLs and bilingual teachers). This is open to all staff including Paras, A. P., Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator and Speech Therapists. Professional Development workshops for staff working with ELLs will be ongoing throughout the 2015-2018 and 2018-2019 school years. These workshops ensure the receipt of 15% for all teachers and 50 % for bilingual and ENL teachers. Once a week, for 45 minutes of common planning time, administrators plan and deliver workshops for ENL and bilingual teachers. Once a month, teachers also conduct after school workshops turkeying ENL strategies in the classroom. The SLC leader keeps attendance lists and copies and uploaded on Google Drive as well as all agendas and materials presented in the workshops. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? . Parents of ELLs are invited to the monthly Parent Teacher Association Meetings and interpretation is provided. Parents receive a newsletter created by the school's Parent Coordinator, describing various events during the academic school year. This newsletter includes Spanish translations. School events such as, curriculum night, workshops, available tutoring, report card distribution, college informational and financial aid sessions are held in the evening twice a year . One College Night is conducted in Spanish for parents. Twice a year , the ENL department conducts an orientation for parents of ELLs in the evening. Teachers hold different workshops to inform parents about curricula, study skills, classroom rules and procedures, goals for achieving proficiency and showing movement on the NYSESLAT, graduation requirements, and use of Skedula and training about how to log in and access information. Twice a year, parents attend the ELL parent meetings curriculum night where teachers discuss one on one the academic goals and for the semester. Parents are assisted in accessing the Skedula system in order to monitor their children's progress. Parent Teacher Conferences are announced in the parent newsletter. Parents can view their children's performance and attendance on Skedula daily. The parent coordinator provides parents with a Skedula password. Through our SLC, teachers create parent outreach letters for students who are in need of early warning interventions. All of these materials are translated in the major languages of the student population. In addition, the Parent Coordinator reaches out to parents to explain school policy, educational programs, expectations, and provide parents with support. They are invited to participate in PTA meetings and functions, and translation services are provided, when needed and available. Materials are translated in the common languages. We also have student leaders assist in other languages such as Bengla and Nepali. Adult ESL classes are offered on Saturdays at Newtown High School.Each ENL teacher keeps running records of parent interactions, either by phone, e-mail, mail, or in person. Teachers often have conferences with parents and students and refer parents to counselors, deans, or assistant principals when needed. Teachers utilize Skedula 6 times a year to create individual progress reports for parents to access from home 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  During Parent Teacher Association Meetings, parents are asked to suggest future workshop topics that will meet their needs. The Parent Coordinator is also available on a daily basis to assist parents by phone and in person to discuss any concerns. In terms of the parents of newly admitted ELLs, the in-take process allows the ESL department to gather information about their specific needs and how we can best support them. Parent/community involvement- Newtown’s Title III program provide parents of ELLs opportunities to learn English. Saturday Instructional Academy gives parents the opportunity for parents to attend 15 sessions. Parents learn skills taught by fully certified ENL/ELA teacher.. The Saturday ENL for Parents class is 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. from October 2015 through June 2016. Parents also take part in the School Leadership Team and Parent Association meetings held on the first Thursday each month. Small Learning Community – International Pioneers hold Parent workshops throughout the year. Topics will include: Discipline, using Skedula, examining Data, and post high school education options. The parent coordinator organizes a potluck dinner for parents and students annually. ELLs encourage their parents to cook and come celebrate the diversity of our school. It is a huge success. We also have an annual Multicultural Show where students perform dances and sing songs from their native countries. Parents come to see their children perform and learn about other cultures. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, John Ficalora, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Newtown High School School DBN: 24Q455 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) John Ficalora Title Principal Charlene Nieves Assistant Principal Griselda Zapata Parent Coordinator Shara Berkowitz ENL/Bilingual Teacher Blanca Jimenez Parent Kathya Haggerty Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 9/19/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/28/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q455 School Name: NewtownHigh School Superintendent: Elaine Lindsey The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Griselda Zapata Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Surveys / RCPL Report from ATS / Interviews conducted by the school staff 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80 Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 1124 1242 40.17 44.39 1119 1247 39.99 44.57 English Spanish 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Parents Newsletter Monthly Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. DOE Translation Unit / In House Bilingual Staff Notices About Parent Teacher Conference Twice a year DOE Translation Unit PTA Meeting Notices Monthly Testing Information / Open House/ College & Career Information /Workshops & Meetings Flyers Ongoing DOE Translation Unit / In House Bilingual Staff / Volunteers DOE Translation Unit / In House Bilingual Staff 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences November & March interpretation service(s)? In House Bilingual Staff / DOE interpretation Unit 9th Grade Orientation / Curriculum Night September Bilingual Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  ELL Orientation PTA Meetings October & March Once a month Bilingual Staff Bilingual Staff / Volunteers 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Calls / Robo Calls using bilingual school staff or the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit Pupil Path / Emails Text Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Memo & Email to staff providing the information on how to use the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit and providing telephone number. Keeping notices from the DOE Translation Unit phone numbers in the Teacher's Room. Providing staff a copy of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663. Assist staff with the translation of documents that will be sent to parents using the DOE Translation Unit or making use of the school-based translation funds. Making staff aware of templates available on the DOE Translation Unit website and of using in house bilingual staff Encouraging staff to watch video from the DOE Translation Unit available online to assist parents, who do not speak English. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Translated Sign by main entrance 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  Having copies of the Bill of Rights available to parents Distributing the Parent Guide to Language Access from the DOE Providing parents with a copy of Achieve NYC Guide from the DOE throughout the school year & Providing and encouraging parents to use the DOE website which offers lots of information Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Surveys Interview to parents and students Pupil Path ATS Reports Parent meetings 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83 
