2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 29Q492 School Name: MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY MAGNET HIGH SCHOOL Principal: ALLIKA THOMPSON 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Mathematics, Science Research and Technology High School 331169 9-12 School Number (DBN): 29Q492 207-01 116 th Avenue Queens, NY 11411 718-978-1837 718-978-2063 Phone Number: Fax: Allika Thompson Athomps8@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Allika Thompson Kevin Ota Deidre Titus William Mazzoli Cherylann Jordan Leader VilmaGonzalez NaissaAIme N/A District Information 29Q492 Juan Mendez Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place Flushing, NY 11354 JMendez2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-7696 Phone Number: 7189782063 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Evelyn Ruiz FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd, Queens, NY 11416 MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-281-3408 Phone Number: 718-281-7690 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Allika Thompson Kevin Ota Deidre Titus Patricia Denzine VilmaGonzalez Naissa Aime N/A William Mazzoli Johnny Recio *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable SLT Chairman Assistant Principal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  MargarethVictor-Germain Hazel Slinger Samuel A. Alphonse Clivenski Michel N/A N/A N/A Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent Teacher Teacher Parent Student Representative Student Representative N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The learning community at Mathematics, Science Research and Technology High School will realize our vision by ensuring that our scholars;  Engage in Rigorous Mathematics, Science, Engineering or Technology Curriculum that provides practical and problem solving work with access to adequately resourced classroom/laboratories and well trained teachers.  Participate in academic, artistic or athletic integrated activities in and outside of the classroom that develop well rounded students able to adapt to diverse environments.  Advocate for Equity for All  Become self aware, responsible, committed and empowered to make an impact in their school and local community through project based learning. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The instructional focus of Mathematics, Science Research and Technology High School is that students will engage in high level discourse and justify their claims orally and in writing with supporting evidence using academic vocabulary. Students will think critically and have access to rigorous curriculum in all content areas. As part of our AP for ALL initiative, students now have the opportunity to attend up to 6 courses in various content areas including AP Biology, AP US History, AP Literature and Composition, AP Language and Composition, AP Statistics and AP Computer Science Principles. Our partnership with the College Now program through York College offers our students college level courses that not only bear college credit but also prepare our students for post secondary experiences. Over 30 students are currently enrolled in 4 courses: Psychology, Sociology, Biology and Computer Science. Our College Access for All initiative affords our students the opportunity to participate in college and career readiness activities such as our annual SUNY College Tour, financial aid workshops for both parents and students, speakers and workshops for Career Exploration Month, after school workshops in Resume and College Essay writing and SAT/PSAT prep. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The two special populations of need at Mathematics, Science Research and Technology High School are our ENL and SWD scholars. Our school has seen a significant increase of English Language Learners at the Entering or Emerging proficiency level over the past few years. Our students with disabilities population continues to improve in the areas of English Regents and credit accumulation however struggles with meeting the college and career readiness index and overall Regents passing rates. Through inquiry work and collaborative planning around academic discussion, specially designed instruction and differentiation, we will continue to align instruction to the needs of our students and progress towards meeting and exceeding the expectations outlined in our instructional focus. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Rigorous Instruction By refining and aligning the School's instructional vision, mission and focus to ensure that teachers actively engage students in critical thinking skills, academic discussion and rigorous curriculum, we are establishing the foundation for progress in this element of the Framework for Great Schools. Supportive Environment Through social emotional wellness programs such as Momentum Education and Restorative Circles, we continue to make strides towards ensuring that our school culture is one where students feel safe, supported, and treated as individuals with specific strengths and needs. In addition, we have established a school wide advisory period where 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  students meet once a week in small groups with advisers who provide guidance and support in areas of academic tracking and socio-emotional support through both College Board and Restorative Circles Curriculum. Strong Family-Community Ties Over the past year and through the transition of new leadership, great strides have been made towards ensuring that the school has functioning and effective methods of home- school communication such as IOS Classroom and it's parent text messaging system. Our masths.org website has been created and updated to contain resources and information that will allow parents and stakeholders to feel welcome, encouraged and informed of both school events as well as academic tools to help their child succeed. Collaborative Teachers Through scheduled daily common planning time, teachers are afforded the opportunity and time to work collaboratively to align their instructional goals and pedagogy to the instructional mission, vision and focus and ensure a high quality teaching experience for the differentiated needs of all the learners in their classes. Teachers have ongoing opportunities to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement within their departmental teams and through the daily work of the Peer Collaborative Teacher/Mentor. Effective School Leadership Since February 2017, new Principal, Allika Thompson-Young, conducts ongoing strategic professional development for teachers and staff, has created opportunities for distributive leadership roles amongst staff and students empowering them to deliver the instructional and socio-emotional support that drives student achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q492 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 415 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 6 7 5 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 32 13 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 75.0% % Attendance Rate 69.6% % Reduced Lunch 7.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.9% 13.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.67 0% 45% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 75% 54% 67.3% 5.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 33 37 83.7% 5.3% 10.6% 66.7% 13.7% 4.6% 4 9% 10.8 N/A N/A 70% 67% 75.6% 14% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. By redefining our school's vision, mission and instructional focus, we are strategically addressing the Framework element of rigorous instruction. Our goal is to strengthen instruction so that it is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. In order to ensure alignment with the new instructional focus of the school, Mathematics, Science Research and Technology High School teachers will focus on developing and ensuring that unit and lesson plans include data-driven instruction and are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. Based on past data trends, including the most recent NYSED School Report Card and the June Instructional Report, students have historically accumulated credit in Regents ending classes, however struggle with passing Regents exams specifically in the areas of Math, Social Studies and Science. Students with Disabilities and Students with limited English proficiency make up a large percentage of the population reflected in this data trend. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Appropriately aligning all lesson plans, unit plans and common assessments, both formative and summative, to the CCLS and NYS content standards will ensure that students have access to a rigorous curriculum in all content areas, increasing their chances of demonstrating mastery in high school level courses both through scholarship and Regents as well as meeting or exceeding the college readiness index. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will improve graduation rate for its subgroups, English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities by 5% as evidenced by the school's New York State Accountability and Overview report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Initial Planning Conferences will require that teachers create 3 SMART goals aligned to the school's instructional focus. During these meeting teachers will be prepared to present disaggregated end of year Regents scores, MOTP and MOSL data as evidence of the need being addressed. At least 1 of the 3 goals must address Students with Disabilities or Students with Limited English Proficiency. Ongoing professional development in all content areas will support teachers in achieving their SMART goals, through weekly school based coaching with our Peer Collaborative Teacher and educational consultants such as NTN for Math, CEI for ELL strategies and Educate LLC for Technology. Using the trends revealed from last year's IEP reviews, our area of focus for our work with students with disabilities will include ensuring that IEPs are well written and reflect targeted tools and strategies for success. This will consist of ensuring that all students are assessed utilizing a uniform and common assessment and intervention program such as Scantron Performance Series and Achieve 3000. The data from these programs will be utilized in order to include Explicit Instruction and Specially Designed Instruction strategies in the Present Levels Of Performance (PLOP) and measurable goals section of our IEPs. Ongoing professional development on Explicit Instruction (EI) and Specially Designed Instruction (SDI) will be provided for all teachers both general education and special education) as a school wide initiative. General education teachers and special education teachers will collaborate during common planning time to create lessons that implement EI and SDI strategies in all classrooms strategically targeting the students selected for the inquiry work addressing our problem of practice and ensuring that high quality IEPs are being produced through these collaborations. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Pedagogues September 15-October 26, 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals Students with Disabilities 1st Checkpoint: September 15-November 30 (End of 2nd Marking Period Principal, Assistant Principals, SIT team Members, Special Education Teachers, General Education Teachers In order to provide targeted instruction to our students with limited English proficiency, the ENL teacher will co teach in Integrated ENL Social Studies classrooms. This instructional model will address the ENL students 1st Checkpoint: Principal, Assistant Principals, ENL teachers, SIT team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  historically low Regents data for our ELL students in all proficiency levels. Edgenuity software will be utilized in all classrooms to provide differentiated and translated instruction in all content areas for languages such as Spanish, Haitian Creole, French, Bengali, Arabic, Urdu and Punjabi. Bilingual students have been assigned as teaching assistants in Integrated ENL classrooms in order to provide additional instructional support while also gaining service experience. Ongoing professional development in all content areas will support teachers in achieving their SMART goals, through weekly school based coaching with our Peer Collaborative Teacher and educational consultants such as NTN for Math, CEI for ELL strategies and Educate LLC for Technology. Pedagogues 1st All Students Leverage of citywide programs such as AP for All, College Access for All, and Computer Science for All to create more pathways for students to graduate and promote college and career readiness among students in subgroups and the general student population. All students will be encouraged to take advanced and specialized courses. Funds related to College Access will be used to promote schools of various kinds (public, private, HBCU) by working with the schools to coordinate tours and experiential events throughout the year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Members, General Education Teachers September 15-November 30 (End of 2nd Marking Period Principal, Assistant Principals, Lead Teachers, PCT, Educational Consultants AP for ALL Team, Senior Team, COSA advisor, Student Activities Team, Guidance Counselors Checkpoint: September 15-November 30 (End of 2nd Marking Period First Checkpoint: October 26-January 18 (end of term 1) How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In an effort to improve parental, family and community engagement, the Mathematics, Science Research and Technology High School has created a nd continues to develop a comprehensive website www.masths.org. Parent and families will be able to utilize this website as a tool to stay informed and plan to attend school events. They will also be able to access the support needed to understand the rigorous instruction occurring in the classrooms as well as the New York State Learning Standards being used to align this instruction. Through PupilPath and IO Education, students and parents will have access to teachers at the click of a button. Messages to and from teachers and parents/guardians can be sent via text and access to grades, scheduled and events are immediately accessible once registered on the account or app. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Attendance will be taken at various scheduled events such as parent workshops, PTA meetings and Parent -teacher conferences in order to monitor the effectiveness of these initiatives. The time line for the first checkpoint will be November 30th, which is the end of the 2nd marking period, Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent coordinator will conduct outreach aimed toward families of students within subgroups. This outreach will promote academic initiatives including weekend and PM Regents preparatory classes and English language support provided by classroom teachers familiar with the student' needs. Educational consultants will be leveraged to support classroom instruction, aimed specifically at helping ELL and students with disabilities to master content. Students who are missing or behind in credits will be enrolled in PM credit recovery courses using the Edgenuity software. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Throughout the year, teachers and teacher teams will utilize benchmarks to track SWD and ELL students' improvement and communicate areas of strength and weakness related to Regents based skills to the students and their parents. Each content area teacher team will create a skills tracker for this purpose. Skedula's progress trackers will also be utilized to teach students how to self assess and self monitor their transcript data and set personal goals and time lines. This data will be examined in January at the end of Term 1 to determine whether ELL and students with disabilities are meeting credit and exam requirements in higher numbers (5 or more percent) as compared with the previous school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Biweekly academic advisory will provide targeted support to students to create personal academic goals, learn habits of mind to help achieve them and monitor and self assess academic progress towards these goals. Skedula progress trackers as well as traditional transcript data will be utilized during these advisory sessions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. According to the most recent quality review, students feel challenged and supported by their teachers, who set high expectations for the student body. As seen in student survey data and interviews with individual students, a positive school culture is embedded throughout all areas of the school 2. One of the school's priority needs is its chronic absentee rate, which is significantly lower than the city average. As seen in the 2016-17 quality snapshot, the rate for Mathematics, Science Research, and Technology High School was 51% compared with the city average of 31%. 3. The school will support the whole child by ensuring that students have opportunities to participate in academic, artistic, or athletic integrated activities in and outside of the classroom (i.e. electives or after school clubs). Students also have opportunities to participate in several leadership and mentoring programs, including one (Peer Group Connection) that pairs outgoing seniors with incoming freshmen for both academic and social and emotional support. Students can attend after-school tutoring as well as Regents and SAT preparatory classes on Saturdays. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, chronic absenteeism will decrease by 10% as measured by ATS reports. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  • Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, community and family outreach, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Attendance Team, Content Team and Grade Team will strategically come with a plan of action to solve chronic absentee All students Home visits, Outreach letters and Skedula will solve attendance issues Use of student attendance data to plan and set goals to reduce chronic absentee Use case studies and data to come up with an effective plan of action Coordination with building safety team to discourage students from entering the building late and leaving the building early. Use of positive-minded incentives (i.e. school trips and events, homework passes, and positive parent phone calls) to promote attendance that are tiered (90%, 95%, etc.) and compel students to make both short and long term improvements in their rates of attendance. Chronically Absent Students Chronically Absent Students Chronically Absent Students Chronically Absent Students Entire Student Body September 15 to November 30 (end of second marking period) First Checkpoint: December 1 to January 18 (end of term 1) September 15 to November 30 (end of second marking period) December 1 to January 18 (end of term 1) December 1 to January 18 (end of term 1) September 15 to November 30 (end of second marking period) Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Attendance Team, Teacher Leaders, and Counselors Attendance Team, Teacher Leaders, and Counselors Attendance Team, Teacher Leaders, and Counselors Attendance Team, Teacher Leaders, and Counselors Administrative Team, Building Safety Personnel Attendance Team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Mathematics, Science Research and Technology High School has an open door policy. Parents are welcome to attend the school and make appointments to meet with their children's teachers to seek help when needed. Parents are asked to volunteer their time to help with outreach, chaperone field trips, and participate as members of the planning committee. During the first term (September 15 to January 18), the school will hold at least five such outreach events to target parents of students across grade levels and promote involvement in school matters. Parents are encouraged to take on leadership positions in the school and are welcomed to use space in the parent coordinator's office to speak with other parents and coordinate their effort. These positions of leadership will be filled during the first term to ensure consistency throughout the school year. Parents receive monthly newsletters and are encouraged to use the school's new website, maintained by the school's parent coordinator, to find workshops dates and descriptions, seek out opportunities for support, and learn about leadership opportunities such as the School Leadership Team (SLT). Staff members will collect up-to-date emails for parents at different points throughout the year to supplement daily phone messages that are sent when students are marked absent during their third period classes, to maximize accessibility for parents of chronically absent students. Skedula (Pupil Path), through attendance updates through ATS as well as anecdotal remarks, will also be used as an alternative to alert parents to their children's attendance in school and specific classes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parents will be provided with workshops as well as print and digital materials for accessing programs such as Skedula that are used to communicate effectively with parents. These resources are to be coordinated by the school's Professional Development Committee, who will work with both parents and teachers to this effect. Time on Tuesdays will be devoted to contacting parents about academic as well as community-based matters (i.e. financial planning workshops and family nights). Parents will also be encouraged to come in person to meet with their children's teachers during these times. Translation Services Funds will be properly allocated to ensure that parents and families are supported in their native language. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of the Fall Term (January 18), ATS data will be examined to determine the amount of progress made toward achieving the attendance goal for chronically absent students (i.e. 5% progress). This data, along with custom STARS reports aimed toward students receiving failing grades, will be used by teacher teams to inform interventions for the second term. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School leaders will assess the progress in June using ATS reports and calculate the number of chronically absent students averaged throughout the year as defined by the Department of Education. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards x (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the most recent NYSED School Report Card (2016-17), Mathematics, Science Research, and Technology High School is making progress targets for its four-year graduation rates, although these targets are not being made for its five-year rates. In all measured subject areas (English Language Arts, Mathematics, Global History and Geography, United States History and Government, and Science), proficiency rates are at or within five percentage points of the district averages. However, the school does not exceed the district average for any one subject. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all content area teaching will be aligned to the NYS CCLS and NYS Content Standards as evidenced by lesson plans, unit plans, MOTP data and Regents data. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development will be aligned to the following topics: Deconstructing the CCLS, teaching to the CORE Curriculum, the use of Blended Learning, Curriculum Mapping, and Pacing Calendars. Instructional Staff Use of rubrics with the language in the CCLS to provide specific feedback to students regarding their work products and Regents exams. All Students Use of student data to set instructional goals and plan units and lessons to meet those goals, and to ensure that students have access to appropriately tiered curriculum throughout their four years at the school. All students Continue to develop inquiry processes with teams of teachers to collect information on the efficacy of certain academic interventions and ensure student progress. Teachers will provide alternate means of assessing students' mastery of the CCLS and content on the NYS Regents exams (i.e. audio/visual presentations), giving students the opportunity to complete a higher number of summative assessments that are varied in terms of skills and strengths. Students, specifically subgroups of students such as ELLs, SWD's, lowest third, and SIFE students. All students September 15- November 30 (end of second marking period) September 15- January 18 (end of term 1) First Checkpoint: September 15- November 30 (end of second marking period) First Checkpoint: October 26-January 18 (end of term 1) First Checkpoint: October 26-January 18 (end of term 1) Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Professional Development Team, Principal, supervisors, and teacher leaders Instructional Staff Lead teachers and collaborative content teams Lead teachers and collaborative inquiry teams Instructional Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the first term, specifically during the initial marking period (September 15 to October 26), teachers and administrators encourage parents to review syllabi, course requirements, and assignments in order to better understand the standards-aligned curriculum their children engage with at Mathematics, Science Research, and Technology High School. All school staff works together (parent workshops, phone messages, and letters to home) to ensure that parents have access to the Pupilpath site so that they can track their children's completion of specific assignments and regulate their academic progress. The first outreach event of the year (September/October) features a curriculum night in which content teams present strategies, curriculum, and assignments to parents collaboratively. Additionally, materials related to the CCLS and Regents exams (i.e. skills assessed, reading materials) will be made available in the various home languages represented in the school so that all students can receive academic support outside of the classroom. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Contract for Excellence funds, Title I, Campus Magnet and Fair Student Funding are used to fund the hiring of teachers, as well as a program of after-school and Saturday tutoring with the goal of increasing students' proficiency and ensuring that the CCLS are accessible to all students who attend the school. Software and textbook funds are used to purchase textbooks and software to promote accessibility of the CCLS (Edgenuity, Achieve3000, and LearnerPal) and for use in the classroom as well as supplemental tutoring. Teachers also use these software resources to track students' progress toward proficiency in specific skills and standards. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of term 1 (January 18), school administrators review unit plans, observation notes and state testing data to assess whether more students are accessing the CCLS-based curriculum. This information is then used to inform instructional goals for the second term. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. At the mid-point referenced above, teachers and administrators review student testing data to determine whether students are appropriately accessing the curriculum (i.e. whether students' January Regents scores reflect improvement from fall baselines), as well as unit plans to assure that strategies and assessments accurately reflect the expectations of the CCLS. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the school's most recent quality review (2016-17), reviewers found that a "positive school culture is embedded throughout the school." Specifically, reviewers noted that the "majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based collaboration," and that teachers use student data regularly to inform their curriculum and instruction. However, on the survey from that year staff responded below borough and city averages in the following areas: questions about collaborative teachers (75% vs. 83/83%); questions about a supportive environment (66% vs. 73/72%); questions about effective school leadership (73% vs. 85/85%); and questions about trust (79% vs. 87/87%). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29 All teachers will receive actionable feedback and support based on the Danielson's Framework for Teaching and the school's instructional focus to improve their instructional practices and promote professional growth. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Peer Collaborative Teacher and teacher leaders to offer their classrooms to colleagues for non-evaluative and unofficial classroom visits in which they model best practices and reinforce feedback from administration. Instructional Staff September 2018 to May 2019 Peer Collaborative Teacher and teacher leaders School and teacher leaders to implement instructional rounds to monitor improvement in implementing common core standards across all content areas. Subject Teachers Use of student data to plan and set term-based instructional goals. Teachers and students will leverage academic advisory sessions, which occur every other week, to examine transcript and assessment data, forming their goals and action plans. Instructional Staff Continued development of the inquiry process in teacher teams to ensure student progress Instructional Staff Implementation of a cycle of walk-throughs for the Administration Team to norm on the Danielson rubric and assess the level of rigor in the classrooms. Instructional Staff Administration and teacher leaders Administration and Content Area Teams Administration and teacher leaders Administrative Team First Checkpoint: October 26-January 18 (end of term 1) September 2018 (fall term) and January 2019 (spring term) September 2018 until June 2019 First Checkpoint: October 26-January 18 (end of term 1) Continuous professional development on the nature of the Danielson's Framework for Teaching and how it is used to improve instruction. Teachers have the opportunity at the close of each session to provide feedback on the relevancy and effectiveness of the session. Instructional Staff September 2018 until June 2019 Administration, teacher leaders, and content area teams Teachers will be encouraged to provide end-of-unit or end-of-term surveys to students to elicit information about students' understanding of objectives and standards, as well as the methods and activities used. Instructional Staff and Students September 2018 until June 2019 Content Area Teams 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be encouraged to provide feedback on the instruction their children receive in the school through the Pupil Path platform, feedback that is forwarded directly to instructional staff. Parents and families during the school's September Curriculum Night will also be given an opportunity to interact with teachers in department teams concerning the school's curriculum, and to provide feedback on the curriculum and teaching strategies through channels such as the PTA and SLT. The Remind Application will be utilized to open lines of communication between parents and teachers and to encourage discussion and feedback around the learning taking place in classrooms. Finally, the parent coordinator will express an open-door policy to parents in which they are invited to sit in with their students in their classes to observe the instruction that takes place. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School will ensure that instructional staff receives non-evaluative feedback and classroom support from sources such as the school's Peer Collaborative Teacher, as well as literacy coaches from outside sources, specifically to focus on engaging students within the school's subgroups such as English Language Learners. Feedback and support will be aligned to areas of focus on the Danielson's Framework. In addition, members of the instructional staff will receive professional learning books on topics like academic discourse that are related to highly effective areas on the Framework, and will be given time to dissect and apply concepts from those texts in collaborative ways. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of term 1 (January 18), the Administrative Team will conduct a review of feedback and support measures provided to teachers throughout the first half of the year. The team will also consider whether teachers are acting on these measures in meaningful ways. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Administrative team will examine instruments such as observation reports, professional development calendars, and Peer Collaborative Teacher support logs to determine whether teachers are acting on feedback and support measures. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the most recent Quality Review (2016-17), "effective communication from school leaders and teachers to parents is ongoing and keeps parents informed regarding academic progress and school-wide activities." Lines of communication between the school and parents are open and working effectively. However, participation from parents at PTA meetings continues to be low (NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection). Likewise, on the most recent school survey, families of students at the school responded that they have had less opportunities (51%) to volunteer time to support the school than borough (57%) and citywide (60%) averages, signifying that there is room to create more opportunities for parents to share a voice in school events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33 By June 2019, parental engagement will increase by 10 % as evidenced by improved attendance in PTA meetings and an increased number of parents returning completed lunch applications. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parents are invited to participate in workshops related to curriculum as well as their children's social and emotional development (i.e. family game night and after-school talent shows/ displays). Parents (all) School website and social media accounts are established and maintained to keep parents updated about events and initiatives in the school community, as well as to provide more information about bodies like SLT and PTA that encourage parents to lend their voice to school policy. Parents (all) School community provides emotional and economic support to families (i.e. gift cards provided to parents living in shelters around Thanksgiving time) with funds raised by the Parent Teacher Association and other school groups. Parents are encouraged to chaperone educational trips and excursions to colleges and universities in order to increase their engagement with the students and school community. Parents and students in need of financial and emotional support. Parents (all) Incentives such as giveaways and access to trips and events will be made available to students who bring important information (notices about meetings, parent surveys, etc.) to their parents and obtain signatures. Advisory classes will be leveraged to distribute and collect this information. Parents and Students. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrative Team and Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator Parent Teacher Association, School Leadership Team, Student Government, and National Honor Society Chapter. September 2018 to January 2019 (first checkpoint) First Checkpoint: October 26-January 18 (end of term 1) September 2018 to January 2019 (first checkpoint) September 2018 to January 2019 (first checkpoint) Parent Coordinator, Teacher Leaders conducting trips and excursions, Parent Teacher Association. Parent Coordinator, Advisory Teachers. First Checkpoint: January 18 to March 15 (end of Marking Period 1, Term 2) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Incentives (i.e. coordinated trip to the Statue of Liberty) will be made available to parents who reach certain goals related to parent achievement. For example, parents might receive an incentive for attending four consecutive PTA meetings. Parents of ninth and tenth grade students will be especially targeted with these incentives to create lasting relationships with parents in the school community. Parents. Administrative Team, Parent Teacher Association. First Checkpoint: March 15 to May 2 (end of Marking Period 2, Term 2) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The school will foster partnerships with health-based organizations like SMILE and Jamaica Hospital to provide services for families and foster a sense of community among stakeholders. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school's parent coordinator will be utilized to maintain the school website and social media accounts, using them to engage with parents, as well as conduct outreach around school-based events like curriculum nights and meetings of the Parent Teacher Association. Teachers will be given specific time each week to make outreach to parents about academic matters as well as school events and opportunities for parents to be engaged such as curriculum and family nights. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of Term 1 (January), Administrative Team will review the extent of parental engagement in school events to determine whether engagement has increased in meaningful ways, and which measures can be added or improved to this plan. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance at PTA meetings, curriculum nights, and other meetings or events to which parents were invited will be reviewed to determine whether parental engagement has increased since September 2018. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) During school, PM School, Saturday Regents Prep Academy. These sessions are generally smaller in number than a typical class. Academic Intervention Support after school tutoring contains 10 students or less per teacher. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37 When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school, PM School, Saturday Regents Prep Academy . These sessions are generally smaller in number than a typical class. Academic Intervention Support after school tutoring contains 10 students or less per teacher. One to one tutoring/ independent learning inEdgenuity course with teacher support during the day, weekends and after school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students will be chosen based on their academic status, not able to pass the require Regents and being lowestthird based on their English an Math scores. However, all students are welcome to attend. Mathematics All students will be chosen based on their academic status, not able to pass the require Regents exams and lowestthird. However, all Teachers will use a variety of methods such as Interactive Writing, Expository Writing, Argumentative Writing, Repeated Reading, Literature Reviews and Short Story. Students preparing for the English Regents exam are givenI-Ready Learning tasks and Regents exams for practice. Students will be taught how to perform a very close reading of a given text in order to respond to multiple choice questions, short answer and critical lens essay prompts.Edgenuity also help students meet credit requirement needed for graduation. Teachers will use a variety of methods such as Problem Solving, Regents Review, and Argumentative Writing. Students are also givenEdgenuityLearning  students are welcome to attend. Science All students will be chosen based on their academic status, not able to pass the require Regents and being part of the lowestthird. However, all students are welcome to attend. tasks that helpstudents improve their literary skills, Edu ware(Software) will be used totarget Regents preparation for the CommonCore One to one tutoring/ independent learning inEdgenuity courses with teacher support during the day, weekends and after school Algebra I and Common Core Geometry Exams. Teachers use a variety of methods such as Problem Solving, Regents Review, and Argumentative Writing. In addition, for Science, students complete Regents Preponline tasks. They use these tasks to prepare for the Regents Exams in Earth Science, Chemistry and Living These sessions are generally smaller in number than a typical class. Academic Intervention Support after school tutoring contains 10 students or less per teacher. One to one tutoring/ independent learning inEdgenuity course with teacher support during the day, weekends and after school Environment. Science teachers also use targeted instruction with During school, PM School, Saturday Regents Prep Academy Social Studies All students will be chosen based on their academic status, not able to pass the require Regents and being part of the lowestthird. However, all review books that allow students to complete more independent practice. Teachers will use a variety of methods such as Essay Writing, Thematic Essay, Document Based Question Essay, Critical Thinking Skills, Review Content, Regents Review, and Argumentative Writing. In addition, students During school, PM School, Saturday Regents Prep Academy. These sessions are generally smaller in number than a typical class. Academic Intervention Support after school tutoring contains 10 students or less per teacher. One to one tutoring/ independent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38 learning inEdgenuity courses with teacher support during the day, weekends and after school Mentoring, one to one basis, Small group During school and after school students are welcome to attend At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who are required to receive support based on their Individual Education Plan and those that need emotional support. are given practice Regents Exam questions and content review. Students also keep records of each exam taken where results are itemized. The students are then made aware on an individual basis of their areas of weakness so they may focus on those areas. Counseling services mandated as per the Individualized Educational Plans; parental meetings; peer-mediation / negotiation and Restorative of Justice. All services provided during the school day. Crisis Intervention Services -one to one and/or small/ large groups when needed. All services provided during the school day; Educational, Psychological and Vocational Assessments: Parent/staff/faculty consultation when needed. All services provided during the school day. Mental health counseling services provided on a one to one basis where appropriate; parental meetings; Parent/staff/faculty consultations when needed; crisis intervention; Social 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  History update for Initial Referrals. All services provided during the school day. Health Services provide by on site Medical Team in affiliation with Jamaica Hospital. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) School has approximately 3 students living in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students living in temporary housing are given school's uniforms, Snap Backpack with basic necessities, graduation dues, notebooks, pens and pencils. Students are given the opportunity to partake in all school's events. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. This year, Principal, Assistant Principals and teacher leaders will be attending various job fairs offered by the New York City Department of Education. Teachers will be hired from Teach for America, Teaching Fellows and open market. School will contact several universities to hire recent education major college graduates who have met all requirements. School plans to hire a Social Studies teacher, Math teacher, Science teacher and Special Education teacher. New teachers who will be hired will receive the opportunity to attend professional development offered by administrative team over the summer. New teachers will be given the opportunity to look at the curriculum and review school’s expectations. New teachers will be assigned a buddy teacher. Social Studies teacher will be given the opportunity to work with the College Board for Advanced Placement. Teachers will receive lesson plans, Power points, resources, Literature Review articles, and books to review and plan for the 2018-2019 academic year. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers will work with their content team. Content team will review the common core curriculum and make revisions through the support of the Principal, assistant Principals, teacher leaders and district specialists. Teachers will join the Inquiry Team and discuss best practices. On Mondays, teachers will discuss best practices, review and discuss various cases, and come up with solutions to various issues encountered in classrooms. Teachers will receive professional development on differentiating instruction, how to conduct item analysis, and planning rigorous and engaging lessons. In addition, teachers will receive professional development from their colleagues on the Depth of Knowledge. Professional Developments will be facilitated by teachers, administration and outside organizations such 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  as Skedula (IO Education) and support center specialists. Professional development will be provided to all content area teachers, Special Education teachers, ENL Teacher and Paraprofessionals. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers will meet within their committees with school’s Principal to make decisions regarding the use and selection of multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided to ensure the use of assessment results. Teachers will discuss with principal the baseline MOSL and provide insights to their inquiry work. Teachers will meet with the Principal to discuss data and future professional development based on their students’ test results on class exams, MOSL baseline, Regents exams, PSAT, SAT, departmental scholarships and attendance reports. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 176,466 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 16,979 47,780 0 0 12,366 2,648,092 Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X x N/A N/A x x Column B Section Reference(s) Educational software such asEdgenuity and Edu-ware, Curriculum staff Development, Equipment, Parental Involvement, General Supplies and transportation forStaff and Pupils, Professional development and field trips. Summer Payroll- Regents Preparation andScoring, SAT Prep, Summer Enrichment Program Hiring of personnel, running a tutoring program and general supplies. N/A N/A Tutoring, Supplies, Enrichment Program Hiring ofPersonnel, Tutoring 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Template Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Mathematics, Science Research and Technology High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [Mathematics, Science Research and Technology High School] will support parents and families of Title I students by: · providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; · providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  · fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; · providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; · sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; · providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: · actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; · engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; · ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; · support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; · maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  · conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; · provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; · host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); · schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; · translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; · conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement · holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; · hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; · encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; · supporting or hosting Family Day events; · establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; · encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; · providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; · developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; · providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Parents, teachers, administrators and students work together to make the school a safe learning environment. Everyone plays an important role in the school and help are given the opportunity to be decision makers. School-Parent Compact (SPC) I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Curriculum is challenging, engaging and aligned across grades, and classes are well defined with their expectations. All teachers are trained and experts in their contents. High standards are set in every classroom with a focus on customized, inclusive and motivating instruction, as well as active student engagement developing critical thinking skills. Parents are given a series of workshops on understanding school's high quality curriculum. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships School informs parents of all events by email, phone messenger, newsletters, web-page and pupil path. Teachers contact parents and set-up appointment to discuss academic progress. Parents receive progress reports from their child's teachers. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff School has an open door policy. Parents are always welcome to come to the school. Parents can set-up appointments with their child's teachers with Parent Coordinator, social Worker or guidance counselors. All parents have access to teachers' emails and can communicate with them 24/7. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Parents are valuable partners and can help school provide the support and needs their children need. School provide parents with a series of workshops to help them with their children, personal needs, and seek support from the community to help parents their own individual needs or provide them with guidance. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities Parents are encourage to participate in many of our school's committee. Parents are to join school's Parent-Teacher Association, take leadership roles and take roles as decision makers. Parents are to communicate with teachers via emails, phone calls or setting up appointments with guidance to meet school's staff with concerns. Parents are encouraged to check pupil path on a daily basis. III. Student Responsibilities Students are to attend school everyday on time, follow their programs, carry their school's Identification Cards, wear their school's uniform, and adhere to school policies regarding safety and learning. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: After analyzing the data of our ELL population and receiving quantitative and qualitative feedback from students and teachers, we decided to add targeted programs to support the varied needs of this growing population of students at our school. In addition to infusing more resources digitally through a school-wide Google drive for teachers of ELL students, we are also increasing the number of Professional Learning opportunities for teachers to expand the tools in their toolkit to provide support for our students. Our students range from Beginning (which includes a significant number of SIFE students) to Commanding students, who need greater support in the content courses as they have the ability to perform well in more advanced course work, but still require intervention/ support from an ENL/ESL teacher who can help them access, master and demonstrate mastery of the various content. Hence, our English language learners will be given the opportunity during the academic year 2018-2019 to receive targeted after school tutoring from the ENL/ESL teacher(s). Tutoring will be offered 2 days per week (Wednesdays & Thursdays) from 2:45pm until 3:45pm. It will be targeted based on students' formative and summative assessments. For example, beginning students will receive support and instruction that focus on fluency, vocabulary and comprehension. Students throughout the continuum will have the opportunity to work in small differentiated groups and have increased opportunities to develop more sophisticated vocabulary knowledge and engage in structured academic talk. Our more advance (expanding/ commanding) students will receive more push-in support with ENL/ESL and content area teachers to equip them with strategies to comprehend and analyze challenging narrative, informational and expository texts. Tutoring will begin September 12, 2018 and end June 13, 2019. In addition, Mathematics, Science Research and Technology High School will continue to provide the Title III Immigrant Program (New Frontiers Program) on Saturdays, which will consist of a certified ENL/ESL teacher. The program will serve targeted ELL students and will differentiate for students via process, product and content based on their needs. Much of this data for planning will come from summative, formative, and qualitative data. Relevant student data gathered weekly from inquiry meetings discussed and strategies to support students are discussed in weekly common planning. Data specific to supporting ELLs are uploaded in a template for each student on a Google Drive. The information on each student profile page will include their strengths, their areas of needs and strategies to meet students' needs. Hence this information can be accessed by any teacher to help develop differentiated lesson that utilize UDL, SDI and instructional strategies that incorporate and address students' individualized needs. Teachers will also be trained to increase and improve the use of standards based online assessment tools such as I-Ready, Learner Pal, Mathletics, Google forms/Flubaroo, Study Island, Achieve 3000, and All in Learning to support our ELLs. All of these tools will be used by teachers that are in this program and during the academic week. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The New Frontiers Program will run from 9:00am-1:00pm for approximately 8 Saturdays and will be offered to English Language Learner students in grade 9-12. The program will begin Saturday, December 1, 2018 and ends Saturday, June 15, 2019. Attendees will receive an English/ Second Language Word-for-Word Translation Dictionaries in their target language, Regents tutoring materials across all content areas, a composition notebook, and will have access to the school's laptops to utilize the multiple programs in Google Classrooms to support their work on Project Based Learning and Game Driven Language Tools to build their own digital portfolios. Students attending the program will work with an ENL / ESL teacher, who will use ESL methodologies and support fellow teachers offering Regents tutoring. They will also participate in Project Based Learning on Saturdays, where there is a large block of time (4 hours) for students to invest the time and effort needed to complete comprehensive projects that incorporate at least 2 disciplines. The program will be designed for all ELLs, however, they will be in various groupings based on need. Overall both programs are designed to provide the necessary support for our ELLs beyond what is required by the state and city of New York. We are clear that more time, effort and subsequent funding for instruction is necessary to help meet students' needs and challenge our advanced ELL students with the right support. It will also have the dual benefit of helping them be more engaged in their coursework in the academic day by specifically targeting their vocabulary, fluency, comprehension skills and conceptual knowledge of various content, as well as help prepare them better to pass and improve their performance on their Regents exams. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Teachers serving English Language Learners will be given a series of on-going professional development workshops on topics that include: How To Provide ESL Instruction Through Content, How To Co-Plan Effectively, Building Vocabulary & Fluency Skills, and The Use Of Rigor And Engagement. In addition, teachers will be given common planning time to collaborate and plan for students based on their needs. Teachers will be trained to use programs such as Snap and Read, Google Translate, Edgenuity (blended learning program that provides instruction in native language orally and in written form), Learner Pal and other programs that support ELL students and meet them at their entry points as well as assess students' progress. ENL teacher(s) programmed to push into content courses will also be provided with common planning time to collaborate with their GE (General Education) & SE (Special Education) counterparts to plan lessons that provide support in content courses and Regents Preparation/ Tutoring Programs English, Science, Social Studies and Math. Professional development will be on-going during the academic year(2018-2019). Professional development will be provided by Assistant Principals, Principal, the FSC, CEI and teacher leaders including the ENL teacher(s) on at least one Monday per month (for 7 of 10 month school year) from 2:40pm to 4:00pm. In addition, the ENL Coach will conduct small group professional learning targeting the ENL teacher and collaborative teachers in the target area of Social Studies. These sessions will be held during professional planning time for 45 minutes 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part C: Professional Development every other week from the month of October 2018 through mid-June 2019. A professional learning calendar will be provided so teachers know when they will receive support and materials that support instruction of ELLs. We will also collaborate with schools within our campus and district to learn and share best practices to support ELLs by inter-visiting colleagues' classes to see how to implement those practices. In addition, supervisors will provide professional development on ENL methodology and use of ENL strategies when teaching across all content. Teachers will each receive two books to support their instruction that will be used throughout the year as resources and references. We will also participate in a Book Study/ Book Club with ENL teachers and other teacher volunteers. The two books are entitled "Helping English Language Learners Succeed" by Carmen Zuniga Dunlap and " Scaffolding Language/ Scaffolding Learning" by Pauline Gibson. Teacher(s) selected to teach English Language Learners Saturdays will be able to share expertise with other colleagues weekly who are co-planning that have same students and English Language Learners throughout the academic day. Teachers chosen will be given the opportunity to share best practices with colleagues in that forum as well. The first professional development will begin September 5. Teachers will receive support and classroom resources from ASCD to post in each classroom to serve as reminders/ methods to support ELLs. They will also work throughout the month of September in Professional Learning sessions to improve lesson planning that specifically uses student data to inform their instruction to support ELLs, SWD, and advanced students. Our Professional Learning goal is to provide tools to immediately provide an engaging and meaningful learning environment for all students including our ELLs. In our first session, we will emphasize how to plan effective lessons to meet the needs of all learners including ELLs and teachers will plan collaboratively. Following this training, additional ones will focus on key pedagogical strategies to support ELLs and other learners including: improving students' writing and reading skills, building academic language and conceptual understanding, differentiation and the use of data, how to analyze students' work, and how to build students' vocabulary, fluency and comprehension skills. All Professional development workshops will be collaboratively planned by administration and teacher leaders and executed in the same fashion. Agendas and attendance of workshops will be kept on a Title III Google Document file to refer back to and reflect on specific areas that need to be addressed for improvement based on inquiry. Agendas and attendance sheets are important parts of our qualitative and quantitative data which will be used to meet our annual goal to improve our English Language Learners' English language skills. The google document will be referenced to show specific areas covered with ENL/ESL and content teachers based on the specific needs of English Language Learners gathered through observations, tests analysis, and one to one interviews with students. In addition, the documents are housed in this fashion for teachers to access information, strategies and data discussed in PL Sessions. The hands-on coaching, modeling, and professional learning provided to the ENL teachers and the general education teachers (who also teach ELLs) will increase the strategies and pedagogical tools that our teachers use to differentiate for the various needs of our ELL population. Through common planning and PL sessions the ENL teacher will also have the opportunity to discuss his/her teaching methodology and reflect with colleagues and share best teaching practices during the week. The application of these strategies on a consistent basis with feedback from administration and ENL coach, as well as analysis of student data to inform instruction, will result in growth for our students along the NYSESLAT Performance Level Continuum. It will also result in increased scores for our ELLs on their Regents Exams. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental workshops will be given to all English Language Learner parents during the second week of September. English Language Learner parents will be invited the second week of September on a Saturday to discuss what the school's community has to offer to them, promote our English Language Learners program, and provide English Language Learner parents with support on helping their children with school. English Language Learner parents will receive information regarding workshops which will be given throughout the academic year (2018-2019) such as Financial Literacy, How to Support Your Child at Home, Progress to Graduation Readiness, Resume Writing, Interview skills, GED and employment opportunities. English Language Learner parents will receive letters of invitation in their native language, phone calls, text messages and/or emails from our Parent Coordinator (who is bilingual), and the ENL teacher will attend all of our workshops of this nature. Skedula, School Messenger, and our school website (which is updated weekly), will also be resources used to communicate on a regular basis with our ELL parents. Through the use of Skedula parents will be notified of all events taking place in our school. Information sent to them will be translated based on their home language using Skedula. All ELL parents will be encouraged to attend workshops. All workshops will be facilitated by school's Parent Coordinator, a supervisor, and/ or special guest that may provide expertise on a topic. All workshops will be an hour long during week nights or Saturday mornings at least one time per month. School will be planning to hold 10 to 15 workshops for parents during the 2018-2019 academic year based on parents need using surveys online, via Skedula, and the Remind app, to gather the necessary data. Most activities will occur Saturdays unless parents provide feedback through meeting surveys that a different time and/or date is more convenient for them. Parental Workshops will be held during PTA meeting monthly. Workshops will be English Language Learner parents will have the opportunity this year along with other parents to increase their involvement with the PTA and attend a community fair in the school. English Language Learner parents will learn what the community has to offer such as medical insurance, job assistance, GED Preparation, Public Housing, Pro Bono legal help, etc. All parents this year will be invited to attend various field trips with students such as College Excursions (in and out of state), and partake in various workshops to help their children with the process of applying to colleges. In addition, parents will be given the opportunity to visit Ellis Island and the Statue Liberty to learn about other immigrants, who arrived to the United States before 1959. English Language Learner parents will learn about immigrants like themselves seeking the American dream and the difficulties they faced to learn the English language and assimilate to American culture. All activities will be coordinated by school's Parent coordinator , the Title III Team (1 AP, 2 ENL teachers, Peer Collaborative Teacher, 2 General Education teachers, ) and the principal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. After School Tutoring teacher: (1)90hrs X $60.65(with Fringes) = $ 5458.50 English Language Learner Saturday Program (New Frontiers): (1) 32hrs X $60.65 = $1940.80 $1233 N/A $2473.20 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Weekday Tutoring will run two hours a week for 45 days. Student will receive After School tutoring beginning September 12 and will end June 13. Teacher will receive four hours of per session every Saturday. In case teacher is absent, teacher chosen to substitute will be paid per session from money allocated for per session. Professional Development Helping English Language Learners Success - by Carmen Zuniga Dunlap Scaffolding Language/ Scaffolding Learning by Pauline Gibson 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. $1233 N/A Other TOTAL Google Classroom Learner Pal Edgenuity Achieve 3000 Ellis Island Excursion 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name Mathematics,Science Research&Technology Borough Queens School Number 492 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Allika Thompson Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ariana Mingos Teacher/Subject Area David Lui /English Teacher/Subject Area Rosemary Zuniga/Spanish Related-Service Provider Joyce Weingarten Superintendent Juan Mendez Assistant Principal Eileen Hacha Sattar Coach type here School Counselor Marie Abellard and Gertrudis H Parent TBA Parent Coordinator Sujeiry Gonzalez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 377 Total number of ELLs 49 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.00% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? N/A for High Schools 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? As an indication of the success of our program, our data reveals that our ELLs are passing their content area classes and are meeting the credit accumulation requirements for promotion to the next grade level. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? N/A 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The overall NYSESLAT scores indicate that 17% of our ELL population is performing at the Beginner/Entering Level , 14% is performing at the Low Intermediate /Emerging level, 14% performs at the Intermediate/Transitioning Level, 55% is at the Advanced/Expanding level. Seven students have reached the Proficient/Commanding Level within the last two years. The area of the NYSESLAT that students show the greatest weakness are in the reading and writing components. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? N/A Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELL are programmed according to their grade (9 th/ 10 th graders and 11 th/ 12 graders) and are homogeneously programmed according to their proficiency level on the NYSESLAT and the NYSITELL. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All students are provided with appropriate ENL classes based on scores attained on the NYSITELL and the York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT). Ours is a Freestanding ENL Program. Instruction is provided by a licensed ENL teacher, Ms. Robison. Our program fully addresses compliance with CR Part 154 for English as a New Language by providing our ELL student population with the required units of ENL instruction: Beginner/Entering Level Classes: 180 minutes of Standalone ENL and 360 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or content area 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Low Intermediate/Emerging: 90 minutes of Standalone ENL and 270 minutes integrated ENL/ELA or content area Intermediate/Transitioning: 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes content area Advanced/Expanding: 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA or content area Proficient/Commanding: 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA or content area Students also benefit from the push-in model with the ENL teacher co-teaching math, science and social studies. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered through a licensed content area instructor with support services from the ENL and ISS teachers. Students are given support via strategies in vocabulary, writing and reading interventions. Teachers provide scaffolding and additional resources in order for students to make progress. The ENL and the content area teacher provide common assessment, analyze results and consider and implement strategies to meet the needs of all students. All content area teachers are made aware during faculty conferences and common planning time of the educational challenges the ELLs face across content classes. School leadership provide content area teachers with instructional support and ideas on differentiated instruction aligned with the new common core standards. Academic intervention is provided through individualized remedial instruction in small groups and in after school programs for SIFE and long term ELLs. All students receive additional support in ENL through Test Wizard/Game. Specific emphasis is placed upon students' abilities to determine importance in the texts that they read. Additional focus is given to test-taking strategies as well as student writing in response to specific prompts. Periodic Assessment tools assist the teacher in gauging the progress being made the students and students' readiness to move onto higher levels of comprehension. The activities are tiered to reflect the various levels of student achievement that may exist in one class. All students are continually assessed using a variety of instruments including Periodic Assessment and Get Ready for the NYSESLAT. The ultimate goal is to increase students' English proficiency while developing and strengthening their academic skills. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At registration, the Guidance Counselors, Ms. Abellard or Ms. Hernandez, and the ENL Coordinator, Mrs. Sattar (a native Spanish speaker) interview the parent and student to determine fluency in the home language. In the event that the student to be registered speaks a low incident language, the Interpretation and Translation Unit assist with the evaluation. Spanish language speakers are administered the Spanish language LAB to further determine students' level of literacy. Mathematics Science Research and Technology High School is deeply committed to the notion that all services to ELLs must be structured to support, enhance and, if possible, preserve the native language while building and developing English as the target language. All ELLs will also have access to multicultural libraries that were selected to meet the cultural interests of students from various ethnic groups. These books were grouped and selected to reinforce linguistic and cultural themes specific to the students native language, culture and traditions. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status (a) We serve SIFE students by implementing differentiated instruction. This will include: pairing with stronger academic students, pairing with cultural buddy and providing one-on-one instruction. Academic intervention is in place with individualized remedial instruction in small groups to better prepare them for the NYSESLAT and Regents exams. (b) Besides programming ELLs who have been in US schools less than three years (newcomers) into the recommended periods of ENL instruction, these students are encouraged to attend tutoring during their lunch period and before or after school hours where the results of Periodic Assessment data are analyzed and instruction is provided to meet their individual deficiencies. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  (c) tutoring is available to all of our ELLs (Newcomers and Developing ELLS) where the student’s proficiency level needs in reading and writing are individually addressed. Furthermore, emphasize is placed on academic language and students are allowed extended time on Regents Exams. In order to prepare students for the reading and writing components, it is necessary to succeed in the content area classes, the ENL teacher emphasizes grammar, discourse, phonological and semantic awareness. (d) With regards to long-term ELLs (in NYC school six years or more), the following program/services are available to ensure that our long term ELL population meets the Common Core Learning Standards for English Language Arts & Literacy in history/social studies, science, and math: Small class size ICT classes which provide content area and ICT methodology One-on-one small group instruction during students' lunch periods and extended day with content area teachers Counseling sessions with parent and child with Principal, AP Administration, Guidance Counselor and Social Worker Referral to HAUP (Haitian Americans for Progress). This organization provides cultural and academic support. All of our ELLs are further supported with the following resources: Bilingual glossaries and dictionaries Beginner Level students are paired with a student translators Increase Number of ELLs taking PSAT and SAT Exams Continued implementation of the Continuum for Academic Rigor and Excellence Document Extended time and separate location during the administration of Regents Exams Translations of the content area Regents exams We continue to support Former ELLs students who have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT through tutoring and Regents preparatory classes. In accordance with CR154, ELLs are programmed into two periods of content area instruction with ENL support. Regents testing accommodations have been extended to former ELLs. The testing accommodations for former ELLs include separate locations, extended time, dictionary and glossaries and home language versions of the Regents exams. Furthermore, ELLs who require more than four years to graduate are provided with extensive Academic Instructional Support: small group instruction and tutoring by content area teachers and independent study under content area teachers' supervision. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All students, especially ELL-SWD’s are provided opportunities to practice active participation in their learning. Through conversations and discussions in class with teachers and other students ELL-SWD’s develop language skills as well as broaden their knowledge and understanding of subject matter. Students are encouraged to collaborate with peers and utilize cooperative Learning strategies. Teachers model how to pose questions and make comments in small discussion groups which ultimately organizes student directed discussions. Overall, teachers use a variety of strategies when teaching literacy to access their student’s needs and determine how to proceed with instruction in the advancement of literacy. Materials include: Springboard Engage New York Audio/Video recordings Manipulatives Graphic Organizers Tables/Charts/Index Cards Regents Prep Books Test Wizard/Game 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  When accessing the least restrictive environment ELL-SWDs have the same opportunities as the general education student. Our ELL -SWD students are programmed in Collaborative ICT classes where they are mainstreamed with the general population. They are provided with leveled texts to better accommodate their reading and comprehension levels. They are heterogeneously grouped to afford greater opportunities in meeting their long and short term annual goals. Utilizing the Individualized Educational Plans teachers become familiar with students testing accommodations to better provide students with the ability to demonstrate mastery of skills and attainment of knowledge without being limited due to the effects of their disability. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We offer the following targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, science and other content areas. All targeted intervention is offered in English: One to one tutoring in the content area with targeted intervention in ELA, math, science and social studies After school academic intervention on Wednesday and Thursday by content area teachers from 2:45pm to 4:45pm After School ELL Tutoring Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:37 to 3:37pm Saturday Regents Prep Classes One-on one small group instruction during students' lunch periods Counseling sessions with parent and child with Principal, AP Administration, Guidance Counselor and Social Worker Referral to HAUP(Haitian Americans for Progress). They provide cultural and academic support. Project Prize 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Students will be provided with I-Pads to accelerate their language acquisition needs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The Campus Magnet Complex ENL model whereby one stand alone, self-contained ESL program served all ELLs in Q492, Q494, Q496 and Q498 will be discontinued. Mathematics, Science Research and Technology High School will hire their own ENL teacher. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are encouraged to participate in all after school activities and events. Title III funding allows all students, including ELLs attend classes on Saturdays, to learn the English Language and trips. ELLs participate in PSAL teams, ARISTA (the National Honor Society), Penny Harvest. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All ELLs are being supported by ESL Readsmart.com in the ENL classroom and computer lab as well as study Island in their content area classes. Geographic Edge textbooks are used in the Beginner level. Their listening and reading comprehension needs are addressed through the use of articles, novels, movies and documentaries. Skedula is used to track student progress. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Since we provide a standalone, self contained, ENL program, which focuses on intense development of academic language and on cognates to accelerate comprehension, we are unable to compare the English performance of our ELL population to performance in their native language. However, the native language support is used as a bridge to transferring receptive and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  expressive 2nd language acquisition. All students are provided with a home language bilingual glossary for support in the content area classes. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required support services and resources are targeted for grades 9-12, thus they correspond to our ELLs age and grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All ELLs are being supported by ESL Readsmart.com in the ENL classroom and computer lab as well as study Island in their content area classes. Geographic Edge textbooks are used in the Beginner level. Their listening and reading comprehension needs are addressed through the use of articles, novels, movies and documentaries. Skedula is used to track student progress. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Prior to the beginning of the school year, incoming students and their parents/guardians are invited to attend the school’s open house and orientation. They are introduced to Mr. Cruz, Principal; Johnny Recio, AP Organization; Eileen Hacha-Sattar, AP Instruction; Marie Abellard and Gertrudis Hernandez, Guidance Counselors. They are given a tour of the building and an introduction to our specialized programs in Law and Community Service. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? French and Spanish foreign language classes are offered as mandated for graduation and as electives for students that pursue an Advanced Regents Diploma. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development Plan 2018-2019 Fall/Spring 2018-2019 Discussion of the uses and implementation of inquiry teams. Develop protocols for school procedures, examples, disruptive behavior, attendance, and classroom management. Develop a uniform grading system. Introduction to SKEDULA, pending on acquiring license. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Develop a plan for the first week of school. Goal: To teach staff the importance of doing inquiry work to become better teachers in the classroom. Format: Professional Development sessions will be provided in a sequence of workshops interspersed with observation, analysis of student work samples, and development of individual learning profiles and learning plans. Teachers will learn from each other. Staff will listen to practices that work or didn’t. Staff will look at qualitative and quantitative data. During the school year, teachers will have an opportunity to work collaboratively to identify, analyze, and resolve barriers to successful learning for English Language Learners (ELL) and all students. The Weeklong Workshop (scheduled for September / October / November/December/January) will be facilitated by a team of professional developers with expertise in the learning community, differentiated instruction, project-based learning, student portfolio development, looking at student work of English Language Learners, QTeLL and Special Education. Differentiated instruction is based on the beliefs that all students differ in their preferred modes of accessing and working with information, that classrooms in which instruction recognizes and respects individual differences, and where the focus is understanding and working with important ideas all produce engaged, successful learners. Days 1-2: Learning styles and Multiple Intelligences Goal: Participants will demonstrate understanding of learning styles and multiple intelligences as useful tools for differentiated activities. Complete individual learning styles and multiple intelligence profiles for themselves. Outcomes: Teachers will be able to integrate concepts of learning styles and multiple intelligence within their content to support all students such as English Language Learners, General Education and Special Education. Days 3-4: What Student Records can and can’t tell us: Goal: Participants will learn to construct individual learning profiles as the basis for beginning to create individualized learning plans for each student. Activities: Teachers will be introduced to components of student records and basic format for individual profiles. Teachers will be provided with students’ diagnostic test scores to review to identify key indicators of students’ strengths, struggles, and interests. Participants will share insights and generate questions related to each student reviewed. Data is analyzed. Outcomes: An Action Plan will be put in place to support all teachers working with ENL students, Special Education Students, Lowest third and general education. Day 5: Clarifying and Sequencing expectations Goal: Using profiles generated during Day 1, participants will analyze demands of common academic assignments in terms of their findings. Activities: Participants will select an appropriate learning standard based on their teaching assignment. Participants will compare existing information about performance levels with expected outcomes for profiled students. Based on this comparison, participants will work in pars to complete a task analysis for at least one learning standard in their subject area. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Participant will explore English Language, Math, Science, United States history, Foreign Language, and technology curriculum goals, and identify common instructional principles across the content area. Outcomes: Participants will complete a task sequence. Fall/Spring Professional Development series Teachers will meet after school and common time to conduct inquiry work and co-plan. Each staff will generate professional development based on what is occurring in the classrooms, and what seems to be working. In addition, teachers are looking for best practices and are reflecting upon their practices. Professional Development concentration will be based on the following topics: Collecting qualitative and quantitative data Progress Report Planning the Student Portfolio Sheltered Instruction For ENL A collaborative and Teaming Approach to Co-teaching with ENL teacher and/or Special education Unpacking Key Standards Unpack at least 3 standards Determining Instructional Strategies to Support Standard RI. 11-12.5 Developing rubrics for student work Integrating technology into the English New Language (ENL) curriculum Analyzing progress and report writing Accountable talking Best practices Literacy committee Critical reflection about teaching. Common Core Unit Planning Teaching ENL and Special Education students through Collaborative Team Teaching The focus of professional development is to train staff to be better in the classroom and to focus on their learners. We encourage our ENL teacher to attend professional development. Our ENL teacher received information of the following professional development that we want her to participate: • Supporting English Language Learners • Content-based Instructional Strategies for ELL • Teaching English Language Learners (ELL) • Common Core State Standards for English Language Learner • Improve English Language Learner Instruction through the Use of Technology for ASPDP • Language and the Brain • Data Analysis and AMAO Estimator 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff are given the opportunity to review their students data. Teachers are given the opportunity to look and discuss their students' work with colleagues. Teachers review English Language Learners,Lowest third, Special Education stats on a daily basis. Teachers are given the opportunity to discuss best practices and conduct inquiry work. This year, the ENL teacher has been given the opportunity to co-teach and discuss ESL methodology with content teachers. ENL teacher provides teachers with resources on providing sheltered Instruction. Teachers working with ENL/ENL teacher co-plan during common planning. English Language Learners are given the opportunity to participate in all school activities, join various clubs and exposed to the American English language and culture. English Language Learners are taken on various school trips such as Museum of Natural History, Metropolitan Museum of art, Bronx Zoo, St. Luke Concert, Washington D.C., Philadelphia, Ellis Island, The Statue of Liberty, African Burial Ground, Tribeca Performing Arts Center and amusement parks to help students assimilate to the American Culture. Our Professional Development is on- going . Teachers not only discusses ELLs but all other students. Professional Development focuses on best practices and working collaboratively. Teachers work together on discussing methodologies such as sheltered instruction for English Language Learners, differentiations , help improve the arts of teaching and to effectively Co-teach. All agendas, resources and attendance sheet are put in a PD binder which is kept in the Principal's office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Schools meets with the parents or guardians of ELLs once every semester, in addition parent -teacher conference and parent orientation meetings, to discuss their child's language development progress, their Periodic Assessment results and the child's language development in all content areas. School records attendance and provides interpretation/translation services. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Parent Coordinator organizes workshops the foster parental involvement. Examples of our workshops are: Title I Preparing for college Common Core Standards Transitioning into high school Citizenship Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Response to question 2, section C above : Teachers and Guidance Counselors keep a log documenting all meetings and communications as well as what is discussed and agreed upon solutions. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  2018-19 SCEP-FL 69 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Allika Thompson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Mathematics, Science Research School DBN: 29Q492 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Allika Thompson Title Principal Eileen Hacha-Sattar Assistant Principal Sujeiry Gonzalez Parent Coordinator Ariana Mingos ENL/Bilingual Teacher David Lui Parent Teacher/Subject Area Hazel Slinger Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Marie Abellard School Counselor Juan Mendez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/1/18 09/1/18 09/1/18 09/1/18 09/1/18 09/1/18 09/1/18 09/1/18 09/1/18 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 29 School Name: Math,Science Research & Technology Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Eileen Johnny Hacha-Sattar Assistant Principal Recio Assistant Principal NO NO Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs to ensure that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language they can understand we used classroom surveys. Classroom surveys gives us an idea of languages spoken, written and read in student's homes. We sent a survey home to each of our students inquiring as to whether or not the parent or guardian needed translation services for notices sent home. We continuously update data on the home languages of the students as they are admitted throughout the school year. We also took an inventory of the HLIS for the ELLs in our program and an overview of the ATS OTELE and RESI reports for our school. We then tabulated the number of parents that spoke languages other than English and determined that there was a need for translation of notices and information about a child's academic performance, ways to increase student achievement and enhance the parents' understanding of 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  academic standards, assessments and tests. We also provide information on parent communication needs in the Language allocation Plan for the school. The ENL Teacher confer with the parents by telephone, and in one to one conferences on their individual communication needs. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Chinese French Fulani Haitian Creole Hindi Mandarin English Punjabi(a.K.A Panjabi) Polish Spanish 3 15 6 13 2 14 2 0 492 1 1 59 0.493 2.47 0.99 2.14 0.33 2.3 0.33 0 80.92 0.16 0.16 9.7 3 15 5 12 2 19 2 1 484 1 1 63 0.49 2.47 0.82 1.97 0.33 3.13 0.33 0.16 79.61 0.16 0.16 10.36 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. At the beginning of the school year and as students are admitted throughout the academic year, health forms, ENL entitlement letters, ENL Parent Orientation Meeting letters and Emergency contact Blue cards are made available in the parent's native language. Moreover, we disseminate DOE translated documents throughout the school year as they become available. We use staff members the are proficient in French, Haitian Creole and Spanish to translate school generated information; such as, school related functions, after school programs and trips. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We hold various meetings throughout the school year. Three Parent-Teacher Conferences are held very semester; meet the teach evening and afternoon conferences. Our Parent coordinator schedules monthly PTA meetings on Saturday mornings to optimize attendance. Parents and students are encouraged to attend College Fairs, Math Nights and Family Literacy venues. Guidance meetings ( with the Guidance Counselor, Assistant Principals, parents and student) and IEP meetings (with parents, student and the SBST) are scheduled as required. The Attendance Teacher does outreach to parents via telephone and home visits. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school sends home translated documents and communications. The LAC ensures that all mandated notification requirements are translated in the preferred home language. Furthermore, translators are available for all face-to-face conferences. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We review feedback on Parent's Surveys and concerns bought up at out monthly School Leadership Team meetings. We monitor and acknowledge positive response to outreach. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75 
