 26Q495 School Name: BAYSIDE HIGH SCHOOL Principal: MICHAEL ATHY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Bayside High School 342 6000 11495 9-12 32-24 Corporal Kennedy Street 718-229-7600 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 26Q495 718-423-9566 Fax: Michael Athy Mathy@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Michael Athy Jonathan Nuwesra Co-Presidents - Paul DiBenedetto and Dana Friedman Marc Cercone Stacey Neeman Yvonne Chen Nancy Guan N/A District Information Geographical District: 26 Superintendent’s Office Address: Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Room 510, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Rcintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5124 Phone Number: 718-923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity Group FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 718-935-5941 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Michael Athy Jonathan Nuwesra Paul DiBenedetto Dana Friedman Nancy Guan Yvonne Chen Joseph Capuana Marc Cercone Steven Jacoby *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Administrator Member/Administrator Member/Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) ShariEng Alex Lee Agnes Mak Dana Friedman Carina Ponce Steven Lerner Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Vision: A school that embodies Aristotle's assertion: "What is learned, is learned by doing." Section 4: CEP Overview Mission: To construct a framework to facilitate continuous and sustainable school development (in accordance with Deming's DCI and Ouchi's Theory) focused on developing staff accountability for improving student performance.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Bayside High School (BHS) services 3,000 students whose families reside in all parts of Queens as well as in the Bronx and Brooklyn. Its diverse student body includes 2,700 students’ eligible for free or reduced priced lunch. BHS’ 9th grade students come from 70 different feeder schools and the school services approximately 300 overage/under credited students who are transfer in 10th through 12th grades. Students arrive with a wide variety of academic abilities and each is addressed by the school’s mission which is that our students’ education will combine challenging, college-focused academics; learning through authentic professional experiences and internships; a wide selection of engaging clubs, teams and events along with personalized guidance support - all designed to ensure success in college and beyond. Our consistent focus on post secondary achievement begins at freshmen orientation and continues beyond graduation through our alumni network. Bayside High School has created Friends of Bayside, which currently coordinates with a range of community groups and businesses focused around integrating the school into its surrounding community (largely through the extensive use of school facilities by local groups) and drawing from the surrounding community for internships and other work-based learning opportunities for our students. Among many, two special initiatives undertaken by the school are its commitment to Whole Child Guidance at the high school level- a first in New York City- and its conversion from an academic, comprehensive, zoned high school into a wall-2-wall college-focused Career & Technical Education High School of choice- another first for New York City. These two initiatives have helped Bayside to progress forward. Through a program of challenging academic experiences, Bayside emboldens our students to attain higher expectations. Families realize we are a caring institution. Bayside had over 14,000 high school applications for the 2018-19 school year. Our parents are consistently using Skedula to remain informed on their children's progress. Our PTA is very involved in school activities and instituted an after school SAT course at a greatly reduced price. Since Bayside is a large high school, we have several key strengths - size, staff and tradition. Our demographic data shows that we are an inclusive, diverse school (44% Asian, 11% African-American, 26% Hispanic and 18% White). This diversity is readily evident and promotes differing viewpoints and provides the cultural richness needed for true academic growth. With a population of 3,000 to 3,200 students, Bayside is a small-large high school. This critical mass enables more Advanced Placement courses, clubs and teams. The size ensures a diversity of learners which keeps the school grounded into developing solutions that work for all of its students. Bayside’s staff is also diverse in its depth and areas of expertise. The staff of 268 teachers, administrators, guidance counselors, paraprofessionals, SBST and secretaries come from different levels of experience (inside and outside of education) and possesses a stratagem of professional experiences. BHS celebrated its 80 th year in 2016 and its traditions (the first music program in Queens; the first Art program in Queens; a longstanding commitment to athletics; the ability to service all students while also drawing widely for the most motivated) are reflected and re-imagined for the 21 st Century in its six unique programs of study: Digital Art & Design; Music Performance & Production (the first in NYC); Computer Programming & Web Design; Sports Medicine & Management; Humanities & Non-Profit Management (also a first for NYC); and Environmental Engineering & Technology. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our student body includes approximately 500 students with Individualized Education Plans; 952 current or former English Language Learners; 1,585 students for whom English is not a Home Language and speak one of 57 languages other than English at home. Our ISS students are programmed according to their IEPs. We currently offer an ENL freestanding program for our entering, emerging, transition and expanding students. Entering and emerging level students receive three periods of ENL per day; transitioning and expanding level students have two periods of ENL per day and commanding level students receive one period per day of ENL/ELA. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  Of the 'The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools', Bayside High School has made the most progress within 'Supportive Environment'. In accordance with our Whole Child Guidance model, students and parents feel prepared for both college and careers. Bayside’s exceptionally high rates for attendance, graduation, credit accumulation, college placement and applications to enter the school are all evidence of its success to date. Paralleling the Mayor's and Chancellor's Equity and Access Initiatives, Bayside High School seeks to increase its four year graduation rate for all subgroups and improve its college readiness rates. We will further expand methods of rigorous instruction in order to increase cross-curricular coherence and writing across the curriculum. More specifically, areas of focus include more rigorous college and career alignment with more professional development on college and career alignment. The school faces challenges to its further development due to the lack of support from the Department of Education in the critical areas of budgeting; enrollment policies; and CTE accreditation. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q495 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 3024 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 212 209 16 85 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 58 34 34 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 73.0% % Attendance Rate 66.4% % Reduced Lunch 7.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 26.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 17.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.1 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 97% 93% 95.9% 35.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES No N/A 592 541 76 92.7% 6.5% 18.0% 11.6% 42.8% 1.6% 22 23% 7.2 N/A N/A 97% 95% 95.0% 58% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A YES NO YES N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The school's strengths relative to this framework element are that with approximately 190 teachers, there are many shining examples of rigorous instructional activities and deep thoughtful discussions filled with critical thinking taking place. We will be utilizing our internal strengths to model best practices as we move toward a more consistent, uniform understanding and delivery of rigorous and engaging instruction. Bayside’s exceptionally high rates for attendance (93%), graduation (98%), credit accumulation, college placement (84%) and applications to enter the school all evidence its success to date as evident in the School Quality Snapshot and NYSED School Report Card. 2. Analysis of in-class observations, lesson plan review, School Survey, and dialogue among administration, faculty, students, and parents indicate need for increased curricular coherence and cross-disciplinary curricular development, particularly between CTE and academic subjects. With emphasis on Common Core incorporation, additional research and development for ongoing growth amongst all learning populations - especially SWDs and ELLs - in conjunction with dialogue among all stakeholders is essential. Feedback indicates a need to increase levels of student engagement as well as normalize standards for assessment and grading across disciplines. 3. Evaluation and revision of units and lesson plans for CTE and academic courses with a focus on writing across the curriculum and higher level mathematics will be conducted to target college readiness and graduation rates. Evaluation of courses for college accreditation will be ongoing. 4. Efforts to increase the rigor of courses to the levels of college and industry standards are underway, and will be further focused upon in 2018-19. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 90% of Bayside High School staff, inclusive of Administration, Counselors and Teachers will be supported by professional development including a minimum of four focused presentations on increasing coherence of curriculum CTE and academic subjects. In turn, by June 2019, more than 50% of all students in grades 10, 11, 12 will have a rigorous experience in a course of study in Mathematics, Sciences, Accredited, Advanced Placement and/or CTE NOCTI courses, culminating in examinations identified by NYCDOE as appropriate for college and career readiness as measured by a 5% increase in CRI. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Review of students' performance on NYS Regents Exams in June 2018, August 2018 and January 2019. Teachers 09/18- Attendance and Participation in Professional Development related to common core integration, learning standards for General Education, SWD and ELL students. Development of teacher teams for cross-curricular curriculum development and review of curricular coherence. Review of student performance on uniform quarterly exams, report card data, regents results. Extensive parent outreach via SKEDULA, parent coordinator updates and conferences. 06/19 09/18- 06/19 09/18- 06/19 09/18- 06/19 Teachers, Assistant Principals Teachers, Assistant Principals Teachers, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors A peer inter-visitation program will be established for the sharing of best practices. Teachers 09/18- 06/19 Principal, Assistant Principals, teacher teams Principal, Assistant Principals, teacher teams Principal, Assistant Principals, teacher teams Principal, Teachers, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors Principal, Assistant Principals, teacher teams CTE teacher/ directors & Assistant Principals will increase the number of courses accredited by colleges. Assistant Principals & teachers will develop expanded format AP courses. Teachers will increase license capacity through TESOL and SWD extensions. 09/18-06/19 CTE teachers/directors & Assistant Principals 09/18-06/19 Assistant Principals, teachers, programming staff 09/18-06/19 Principal, Assistant Principals Students with Disabilities, ELLs, all students Students with Disabilities; ELLs; all students Students with Disabilities; ELLs; all students 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. On September 4, 2018, BHS will host "Parent Orientation Night" to explain to the parents of our incoming students the standards and rigor of high school in academic, extracurricular and social facets of their children's lives. It will be presented by the Administration, Student Support Services and Student Life departments. Our guidance counselors, nine of 14 are bilingual, will be present to translate and talk with parents. Throughout the 2018-19 school year, in conjunction with the Bayside HS PTA, monthly parent workshops will be conducted on a variety of topics across content areas, safety, discipline and college and career readiness. The workshops will include time for students' families to ask questions regarding content and student progress. The APs of Supervision, Student Life and Student Services will work with the guidance department, CTE teachers/directors and the Parent Coordinator to organize and supervise these sessions. In addition to report cards, Bayside High School provides each student and his/her families updated transcripts three times a school year which detail the student's work. Additionally all parents receive information on signing up for and the use of PupilPath. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Subject to finalized school budget: The following resources will be utilized in order to implement the action plan: Teacher and Guidance Counselor Per Session to review student performance and plan and implement interventions OTPS- Postage will be used to mail home regular progress reports to parents AP, Teacher and Guidance Counselor Per Session to run the evening parent workshops Programming will be altered to allow for expanded AP courses & ICT sections of piloting AP courses (Teacher salary & time/space) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 5  As of February 10, 2019, as data is available from the Fall semester, progress of the targeted students toward achieving parity with the general population will be assessed in STARS correlating passing % in CTE courses vs. academic subjects for the same students. The principal, assistant principals, guidance counselors, CTE Program Teacher-Directors, SLT, Parent Coordinator, and faculty will be involved in the overall assessment per CTE program and academic subjects. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) By February 2019, staff will have engaged in at least three CTE/academic cross-curricular professional developments opportunities.STARS course passing rates for applicable courses for the targeted population as of MP2 (end of semester 1). Observation reports of all teachers will be reviewed for evidence of cross-curricular integrations Part 5c. BHS has conducted more than three CTE/academic cross-curricular professional developments for staff. Assistant Principals have implemented CTE/academic curricular coherence in observation reports as feedback for their teachers. Additionally, data from the fall semester on students progress has been assessed and included in observation reports for teacher reflections. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The School Quality Guide (SQG) was analyzed by the SLT along with the School Survey, and internally generated data to determine that Bayside High School ranks highest among zoned high schools in multiple areas of measures and very high among all high schools in other areas of measure, including 4 year and 6 year graduation rates. The focused study of the School Survey and interviews with students and parents indicate that although the school’s integrated approach to college preparation through Whole Child Guidance is widely understood and embedded, more extensive outreach to students concerning the importance of high school graduation, college and career opportunities and procedures is needed. Bayside High School has established a college and career resource center to aid in this, more work needs to be done as the six month post secondary enrollment rate of 84% indicates. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a fully integrated college and career data tracking system, Naviance, which aligns student strengths and interests to postsecondary goals, improves student outcomes and connects learning to life will be operational. By June, 2019 90% of all students will have a Naviance account and 90% of BHS juniors will be signed on to Naviance. Naviance will be presented to students, parents and staff in three meetings. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Increased interaction with guidance counselors and students in advisory meetings and through purchase of Naviance. All Students 09/18 - Assistant Principals & counselors Schedule professional development every month organized by teacher facilitators, department APs, or consultants focused on college procedures & financial aid Counselors, teachers, Assistant Principals Develop additional parent works vis-a-vis financial aid and college admissions process. All students, parents 06/19 09/18 - 06/19 09/18 - 06/19 Assistant Principals & PD Committee (SDC) Assistant Principals & counselors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Bayside High School will  Naviance will be accessible to all students. It will help students and their parents explore their interests and  strengths and develop an actionable plan. Share college and career information with parents during regularly scheduled parent and school meetings (SLT, PTA, 9th grade Orientation, etc.)  Maintain our Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families and to help communicate this goal.  Provide parents with online access to student data including current progress towards post-secondary readiness, and progress towards graduation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Subject to finalized school budget: - Per session & Per diem for training of resource center staff & counselors; 8  - Purchase of Naviance system. - Honoraria for guest speakers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Bayside High School will analyze student data and utilize Naviance. To track each student's college applications, 90% of all students will have a Naviance account by February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 90% of all juniors will be identified in Naviance by June 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data indicates that cross-sectional, course-based quarterly exams (QAM) promote coherence and pacing among teachers enabling students to progress and demonstrate mastery of course content and embedded higher level thinking skills in all courses. Higher-order thinking skills are valued because they are believed to better prepare students for the challenges of adult work and daily life and advanced academic work. Higher-order thinking may also help raise standardized test scores. A curriculum emphasizing higher-order thinking skills has been found to substantially increase math and reading comprehension scores of economically disadvantaged students (Pogrow, 2005). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. All departments will align course content instruction to QAMs to facilitate measurements of progress of higher order thinking skills among course sections. By April 20, 2019 (Term 3) correlation of QAM passing and course passing will be at 85% or higher. QAMs and higher order thinking skills will increase the number of students in higher level mathematics courses. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Creation of Common Planning time and other coordinated time for collaborative work. All teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Programming staff Data and rigorous student work will be used to refine curricula and academic tasks to engage students to that they may integrate higher order thinking skills, whether they are Gen Ed, ELL's or SWD's. Teachers will use a variety of questioning techniques, materials and resources in creation of QAMs. All observations conducted under Advance will “inform” the observation-recommendation-development-re-observe cycle. Teachers, Assistant Principals Teachers, Assistant Principals Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers, Assistant Principals 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers, Assistant Principals 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Extensive outreach to families to accentuate the importance of success on the QAMs will be conducted. As parents can be resistant to higher level math courses, guidance counselors will need to accentuate that mathematics is key for future educational and occupational opportunities, and it may be central to improving the economic and social conditions of youth especially from disadvantaged backgrounds Course outlines or syllabi will be available to all parents online. Provide parents with online access to student data including current progress in coursework, results of assessments and progress towards graduation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Subject to finalized school budget: - Per session & Per diem teacher teams to meet & collaboratively design embedded LPs & UPs; 1  - Programming of time/space for regular, collaborative work on QAMs - Per session & Per diem teacher teams to visit identified model schools Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Term 2 (February 2019) correlation of passing rates in courses and on QAMs will exceed 70%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student performance on QAMs for terms 1, 2, 3 and 4. If course sections' performance varies widely on the QAM, Administration and teachers will analyze results to make adjustments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 School Survey, students do not feel supported by teachers. This is at odds with teacher responses to similar questions. There is a need for more overt support and room for improving the perception and provisions of support for students and to support students' social-emotional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. There will be an increase of 2% in positive responses by students to the teacher influence questions on the 2018-19 School Survey. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Identify potential leaders for vertical and horizontal and horizontal teacher teams. Provide training and opportunities for professional growth among teachers. Teachers 9/18-6/19 Teachers 9/18-6/19 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Presentations to parents concerning social/emotional supports and adolescent development. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session & Per diem for training of staff & counselors; Principal; Assistant Principals; Guidance Counselors; Teachers; Parent Coordinator; Field Support Center & PSO providers Coverages for teachers on PD or committee assignment Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The number of teachers and other staff participating in professional development focused on social/emotional development will exceed 50% of the total. 4  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By June 2019 we will measure how many teacher leaders we have in the building as compared to last year at the same time and will see an of 5% increase in teacher leaders. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The School Survey gives Bayside High School a 74% positive rating in strong family-community ties. To this end, the School Leadership Team will focus intensively this year on how many parents representing which demographics and sub-groups within the school attended which school events. After deliberation, it will be determined if there would be a substantial benefit to exercising a concerted effort to focus on expanding the reach of school events which lend themselves readily to a family element. Additionally, the SLT in conjunction with the PTA, can then schedule PTA meetings to coincide with well-attended school events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through Social Media and an updated school website, we will increase outreach efforts to parents and students in order to "better inform our school community" as evidenced by positive response feedback from parents in the School Survey from 74% to at least 76%. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Creation of a formal SLT sub-committee to reinforce, publicize and coordinate community wide function (Orientation, Meet and Greets, PTA meetings, Open Houses). Sub-committee members will include student representatives from the Student Organization, parents and faculty-at-large. Departments will adopt an event to encourage students and their parents to attend. Phone blasts and email notifications will continue to be used. Teachers will be invited to present to the PTA on a broad spectrum of pedagogy to encourage a stronger home/school connection. Outreach efforts will be made to invite feeder schools' families to events throughout the year. All Parents 09/18-06/19 09/18- 06/19 All Students 09/18-06/19 09/18- 06/19 Feeder schools and their families 09/18-06/19 09/18- 06/19 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The PTA, Friends of BHS and other non-profits with which the school regularly participates. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In an effort to encourage more involvement in after-school activities and capture accurate numbers, per session for staff will be offered. BHS will backpack and mail out event flyers. OTPS - Postage will be needed for flyers/letters to be mailed home and distributed to each student, parent and staff member. Per Diem/Prep Pd. Coverage - Prep coverage will be scheduled so all involved parties can attend meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 7  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Regents week of January 2019, an SLT Get the Word Out sub-committee will be established to analyze the collected data on attendance of school events year to date. Two meetings will be scheduled in early Spring for improved quantifying of attendance for remaining year events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Improved attendance at all PTA meetings and all other school functions as compared to previous year. As evidenced by sign in sheets, increased School Survey response by the parents and/or seats occupied in the Auditorium. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Student performs below the benchmark on required checkpoints and/or assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Students whose IEPs specify CTT are programmed for CTT classes with two teachers. Classroom Classroom Small group Small group Student is failing or has failed two or more academic subjects on progress report and/or report card Student failed two or more regents exams required for graduation Students whose IEPs specify SC are programmed for SC classes with dual licensed teachers. Classroom Classroom Classroom Small Group Low entering students are programmed for supplemental skills classes. Tutoring is available throughout the school day & after school. Students are programmed for summer school to assist with credit accumulation. During the school day During the school day During the school day 9  Mathematics ELLstudents are programmed for double period classes. Peer tutoring is also available Student performs below the benchmark on required checkpoints and/or assessments Student is failing or has failed two or more academic subjects on progress report and/or report card Student failed two or more regents exams required for graduation Students performing below grade level were programmed for 4 semester Algebra classes designed to build the foundations necessary to complete high school mathematics; Students with developing skills are enrolled in an intermediate course between algebra and geometry. Classroom Classroom Classroom Small group Small group Small group Classroom Small group During and after the school day During the school day. During the school day During the school day During the school day During the school day During the school day During the school day During and after school day 0  Science Student performs below the benchmark on required checkpoints and/or assessments Students whose IEPs specify CTT are programmed for CTT classes with two teachers; Students whose IEPs specify SC are programmed for SC classes with dual licensed teachers; Low entering students are programmed for supplemental skills classes Tutoring is available throughout the school day & after school Students are programmed for summer school to assist with credit accumulation Peer tutoring is also available. Students whose IEPs specify CTT are programmed for CTT classes with two teachers. During the school day During the summer school day During the school day Classroom Classroom Small group Small group During the school day During the school day During the school day 1  Student is failing or has failed two or more academic subjects on progress report and/or report card Students whose IEPs specify SC are programmed for SC classes with dual licensed teachers. Student failed two or more regents exams required for graduation Social Studies Student performs below the benchmark on Low entering students are programmed for supplemental skills classes. Tutoring is available throughout the school day & after school. Students are programmed for summer school to assist with credit accumulation. Content area classes in Living Environment, Earth Science and Chemistry are taught in English with an ESL methodology in classes for ELL students. Peer tutoring is also available. Students whose IEPs specify CTT are programmed for CTT Classroom Classroom Small Group During and after the school day During summer school day During the school day During the school day Classroom Classroom During the school day 2 Small group Small group Classroom During the school day During the school day During and after the school day During the school day. Classroom Classroom During the school day During summer school day required checkpoints and/or assessments classes with two teachers. Student is failing or has failed two or more academic subjects on progress report and/or report card Student failed two or more regents exams required for graduation Students whose IEPs specify SC are programmed for SC classes with dual licensed teachers. Low entering students are programmed for supplemental skills classes. Tutoring is available throughout the school day & after school. Content area classes in Global History, US History, Government and Economics are taught in English with an ESL methodology in classes for ELL students. Peer tutoring is also available. Students are programmed for summer school to assist with credit accumulation. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Student may be eligible for AIS if: 3 School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Small Group One to One One to One Classroom behavior is inappropriate, unpredictable, or indifferent Student attendance is poor Teachers and/or parents recommend AIS services Supplemental group guidance support provided to students as they transition to least restrictive environments. Outreach to students and parents of students not meeting promotional requirements. Counseling services and referrals to outside agencies are provided on an individual needs basis. During the school day During the school day During the school day 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Bayside High School currently has six students in STH. On our intake form for new admissions, parents identify their housing status and information is entered by the pupil accounting secretary. The questionnaire and McKinney-Vento Act Guide are given to all new students and parents. There are currently four students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 5  Additional guidance counseling services and intervention programs are provided for these students. Students designated in temporary housing are provided with emergency supplies, such as school supplies, books, glasses, etc. so they have opportunities to succeed academically. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not Applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. Not Applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not Applicable 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We use HR to assist as well as reaching out to teacher preparation programs such as Teach for America, the Teaching Fellows, and local graduate schools of education in the NYC metro area (Lehman College, NYU, Teachers College/Columbia). Bayside High School hires highly qualified candidates based on assessment of our student needs. Bayside High School conducts a rigorous and extensive interview process that includes a mock lesson in which the candidates is able to demonstrate content knowledge, teaching skills, and technology usage. Our teachers are offered supports to help them with their professional growth through ongoing professional development within the school and our network. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development topics are discussed and a part of our department and faculty conferences. We participate in all borough-wide and citywide staff development. Ongoing training and professional development is provided through formal and informal observations, attendance at university and community workshops, and supervisory assistance. Teachers also have the option of participating in inter-visitation and becoming a buddy teacher to new teachers. We also fully participate in the New York City Mentoring Program, assisting new staff members in teaching techniques, strategies, and professional development. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 7  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction.  Teachers gather and analyze a comprehensive range of data, which includes but is not limited to periodic assessments, regents’ exams and diagnostic assessments.  Train & coach staff to use data in planning & assessment-particularly for underachieving students as  measured by scholarship reports at end of each marking period. School leaders have aligned professional development to the needs of the teachers and to the Professional Teaching Standards.  The Principal has made strategic decisions regarding staffing, scheduling and the use of resources to support  students achievement. Standardize the recording of formative assessments & disseminate data to staff in a timely manner including year-to-year and grade level performance data. Progress measured by ongoing informal/formal feedback by teachers throughout each term.  Encourage teachers to access data & to use pupil personnel services as measured by informal/formal  feedback by guidance staff and teachers throughout each term. Streamline & increase staff participation & transparency in programming. Progress measured by ongoing informal/formal feedback by teachers and staff at end of each term. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 8  each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1, 441, 523.00 19, 534.00 $18, 220, 454.00 x x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 4a; 5B, 4a; 5C, 4a; 5D, 4a; 5E,4a 5A, 4a; 5B, 4a; 5C, 4a; 5D, 4a 5A, 5a; 5b, 4a; 5C, 4a; 5D, 4a; 5E, 4a 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 9   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. BAYSIDE HIGH SCHOOL , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. BAYSIDE HIGH SCHOOL will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 1  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) BAYSIDE HIGH SCHOOL n compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 3  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 4  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act. Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 5  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 6  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: At Bayside High School there are approximately 180 students in the program who speak a variety of different languages including: Albanian, Arabic, Armenian, Chinese, Dari, Haitian-Creole, Hebrew, Hindi, Khoisan, Korean, Pashto, Serbo-Crotian and Spanish. We currently offer an ESL freestanding program for our entering, emerging, transition and expanding students. Entering and emerging level students receive three periods of ESL per day; transitioning and expanding level students have two periods of ESL per day and commanding level students receive one period per day of ESL/ELA. New ELLs are identified at their feeder schools or at Bayside High School by specially trained faculty and staff, including the ENL Coordinator, bilingual guidance counselors, ESL teachers and paraprofessionals who are dedicated to the advisement , appropriate placement, programming and advancement of ELLs. Particular attention is given to the identification of Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE), students who are illiterate in the native language, students in need of instructional support services, and long term ELLs in order to provide the most appropriate instruction from the start. Peer support partnerships are established through the Guidance Department in order to create resources for the newcomers as well as opportunities for informal but real exchanges in the target language - English. Teachers are available to tutor ELL students daily in a designated area designed specifically for tutoring purposes. All faculty members work together to monitor the progress of newcomers and work collaboratively to effectively address their needs. All ELL students are offered regents level courses. As part of our school program, content area classes for ELL students in Social Studies and Science are conducted in English using ESL methodologies focusing on the required skills necessary to pass the regents examination. These skills include note taking, essay writing and critical analysis. The ESL curriculum mirrors the ELA curriculum focusing on the development of reading, writing, speaking, vocabulary and critical thinking skills. We offer the Saturday Academy to all of our 180 students with approximately 75-100 of our ELL students in grades 9-12, at the beginning, intermediate and advanced levels of proficiency registered. This program will concentrate on direct instruction in English language improvement and Math enrichment. Skills focused on vocabulary, reading comprehension passages, identifying sentence errors, developing your own point of view, arithmetic and algebraic word problems, data interpretation and probability, etc. The program will take place on Saturdays from 8:00 am to 12:00 pm. Books and the "Discovery Magazine" for students are used as supplemental materials. The students attending are in grades 9-12 and are placed in one of three sections based on their scores on the NYSESLAT exam, with a maximum of 25 students in each section. One section will run for the beginner students and two sections will run for the intermediate and advanced students. The English sections will all be taught by certified ENL teachers and the subject content area teacher will be supported by a push-in ENL certified teacher. The program will run for 15 sessions throughout the year, beginning in November. All classes are taught by dual certified ENL and content area teachers, who will all be licensed and New York State certified personnel. 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information We plan to continue our partnership with the Arts Connection by offering spoken word workshops in ENL specific classrooms for 9th through 12th grade. Bayside High School and Arts Connection have built a successful partnership since implementing an art residency enrichment program in the summer of 2015. The theatre teacher facilitated a series of increasingly complex activities that taught ELL students physical and vocal expression as well as scene-writing in an environment that she skilfully made creative and safe for a group of students facing social and emotional challenges when tasked with speaking in English. Both Arts Connection and Bayside High School facilitators observed that students not only gained theater language skills within class, but that these skills translated into increased comfort, confidence and willingness to express themselves in English, outside of the residency program as well. We are pleased to continue our Arts Connection residency program for the 2018-2019 year moving from theatre to spoken word. At the cost of $10,00.00 this partnership will take place over 13 sessions for three classrooms of varying levels of ENL students. This direct instruction includes: · Establishing learning objectives for lessons, activities and projects, and then making sure that students have understood the goals. · move&nbsp;students towards stronger understanding and the achievement of specific academic goals. · scientific&nbsp;experiment--so that students know what they are expected to do. · knowledge and skills being taught. · Purposefully organizing and sequencing a series of lessons, projects and assignments that Asking questions to make sure that students have understood&nbsp;what has been taught. Reviewing instructions for an activity or modeling a process--such as a Providing students with clear explanations, descriptions and illustrations of the rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: The school provides professional development for all teachers and guidance staff on the delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. All staff is responsible to monitor the progress of these students and work collaboratively to address their needs. Professional development is conducted during department meetings, on staff development days and, at conferences outside of the building. The ENL Coordinator and the Assistant Principal of ELA will be presenting professional development for four teachers who are teaching in the Saturday Academy from 12pm-1pm. The tentative topics are as follows: Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered 0  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · · name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: To increase 4-year college readiness index through institution of professional development and teacher commitment to student progress in English Language Arts and Mathematics. To increase college and career preparatory course index through establishment of a school culture driven by the expansion of college accreditation, guidance support services, and universal integration of academic policy. To promote active parent participation and to ensure complete understanding and informed choice, communication with parents is done in multiple major languages - Chinese, Korean, Spanish, English - and facilitated by the Administrative Staff, the ENL Coordinator, the Guidance Department and the Parent Coordinator. The Phonemaster system is used to send messages in English, Chinese, Korean and Spanish to all students At the start of each school year, parents of ELLs are invited to meet with the school faculty at an open house during which city and state standards,assessments and ESL program expectations, requirements and curriculum are explained. Invitations are sent out in English with translations in the three major languages that our ELLs speak: Chinese, Korean and Spanish. Translators are available at this and all other school functions (Parent Teacher Conferences, PTA meetings, College Nights, Financial Aid Meetings, Awards Assemblies) Furthermore, Department of Education publications offered in languages other than English are made to address the needs of all parents. Staff members who deal directly with the ELL population also serve to familiarize incoming and current students and their parents with ESL Curriculum and Instruction, the city and state standards and assessments, and supplemental education opportunities as well as address any concerns or questions they may have. Ongoing parent outreach throughout the school year via phone calls with teachers of ELL students are also scheduled. Tentative topics and dates for parent workshops (Scheduled for 7 pm) and presenters: We have an active PTA that hosts monthly meetings and a variety of workshops. The Multicultural event which is held every year, provides an opportunity for parents of ELLs to participate and show pride in their culture. Parents' questions are brought to their child's counselor and addressed at meetings. Parents are encouraged to schedule appointments to meet with their child's teachers, guidance counselor, dean or assistant principal, when they feel it is necessary. We also host Orientation sessions as well as Parent Intervention sessions. The parents of ELLs communicate with the teachers via e-mail and telephone. The NYC DOE’s Translation and Interpretation Unit provides the service of over-the-phone translation, which is utilized by teachers in cases where home contact is needed and a parent does not speak English. If a parent brings up a concern, it is addressed meeting. Interpreters are provided for our students’ parents at their request during Parent Teacher Conferences, IEP meetings, and Parent Intervention meetings. In addition, letters sent home to parents of ELLs can be translated with the support of the Translation and Interpretation Unit. In addition, 10 guidance counselors will hold two evening guidance ELL nights for approximately 33 hours between 6pm-8pm. Tentative dates for these workshops will be determined. The need for the evening sessions will ensure that we are able to make contact with and support all parents, most of whom work during the day and are unable to attend meetings with the counselors during the school day. Ten Guidance Counselors are on staff because we program the ELL students to be served by a counselor who speaks the home language of that student (e.g., - Korean students have a Korean speaking counselor, Chinese students have a 1  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Chinese speaking counselor, etc.). Counselors will begin the sessions by presenting a PowerPoint for parents on "What ELL students can expect when applying for College" as well as discuss a College Readiness pacing calendar (in multiple languages). Parents will then be given the opportunity to break out into workshops on the following topics: (1) tutorials on how to use scholarships geared specifically to ELL students, (2) meet with ESL alumni guest speakers who are presenting their struggles and successes in their college and job application process (3) meet with their child's counselor who will translate and interpret current guidance documents, (4) small focus groups of ELL parents whose children have interests in the same field of study and help them create a list of colleges that focus on that particular field. Additionally, parents will be able to use this time to speak to counselors and ask any questions/discuss any concerns they might have. The second Guidance Night will mirror the first night with the addition of breakout groups on (1) summer classes students will be eligible to take at Bayside High School, (2) next steps for students to take over the summer in preparation for their College Applications, (3) what colleges look for in a well written college essay. Parallel to these guidance nights, we will be running separate nights with similar content to parents of our FELL students. Our teacher salaries for the Saturday Academy and professional development are four teachers for 15 four hour sessions at $50.13 per hour. This is a total teacher cost of $14,566.00. Other necessary consumable supplies and the postage and paper for parent involvement. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel 2 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Other TOTAL 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name Bayside High School Borough Queens School Number 495 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Michael Athy Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher type here Teacher/Subject Area Jessica Ostrowsky Teacher/Subject Area Dayana Jedretic Related-Service Provider Jamie Hermel Superintendent Juan Mendez Assistant Principal Shana Tessenholtz Coach type here School Counselor Crystal Shim Lee Parent Helen Moon Parent Coordinator Lori Parvis Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Angela Bernaudo (LAB/Besis) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 7 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification NA Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 7 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 2957 4 Total number of ELLs 180 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.09%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 na Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. We use the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL exams as an indication of a student's level of skill. Regents exams given in Chinese and Korean are a good indicator of a students' reading level in their native language and helps to inform the school's instructional plan for these students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All teachers are involved in this effort. We, as a school are diligent in ensuring that all students receive their mandated services and accommodations. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 5  We evaluate the success of our ELL program based on the yearly annual progress report, NYSESLAT proficiency exam, Regents exam reports, TOEFL scores, PSAT scores, SAT scores, participation in College Now classes, college credits while earned in high school, success in advanced placement courses, High School graduation rate. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The LAP team (administrators, ENL teachers, guidance counselors, related service providers) meet to discuss the needs of students and ensure we have the assessments and instruction needed to support academic performance. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not Applicable 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After reviewing the data patterns from the NYSELAT and ELA Regents, we have concluded that our ELL students are making steady progress. The longer amount of time they spend in the United States, the more proficient they are. Having constant exposure to the language has improved their skills. In fact, currently we do not have any students in the 11th grade who are scoring at the beginners level. The NYSITELL data reveals that most over the counter students seemed to have had exposure to English in their Native Country and are scoring at the Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding levels. Some are even scoring at the Commanding level. Students do better on the passive skills of listening and reading comprehension but their writing and speaking skills need more focused instruction. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The LAP team (administrators, ENL teachers, guidance counselors, related service providers) meet to discuss the needs of students and ensure we have the assessments and instruction needed to support academic performance. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding English as a new language (ENL) programs provide instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. Students will be grouped homogeneously, with students of the same level in each class. Instruction will be delivered by a dually certified teacher (ENL and a content area) or co-teaching by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher. Entering and Emerging classes have a combintaion of stand alone and integrated classes, where the teachers work together to provide instruction in the class. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 6  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Beginning/Entering level students are given three periods of ENL per day (540 minutes per week); Low Intermediate/Emerging Level Students have two periods of ENL each day (360 minutes per week), Intermediate/Transitioning and Advanced/Expanding Level students will have one period of ENL per day (180 minutes per week) and Proficient/Commanding level students receive.5 periods per day ENL (90 minutes per week). All mandated minutes are scheduled in block scheduling and teachers teach double or triple periods based on the students in their classes. In fact, we provide more than the mandated minutes of instruction. Since research has shown that a high level of literacy in one’s native language enhances the acquisition skills of the second language, we provide support classes in Chinese and Korean which are the two largest language groups in our ESL program. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content area classes in Global History, US History and Government, Living Environment, Earth Science, Chemistry are taught in English with an ESL methodology in classes for ELL students. Materials used in these classes include textbooks, handouts and websites. Methods used to deliver core content include scaffolding understanding, purposeful grouping, providing students with relevant background knowledge, extended discussion and valuing linguistic differences. The ELL teacher works with ELL students to review material. Tutoring during the day, title III Saturday classes and after-school programs are provided for supplementary instruction for ELL students. All four language skills — listening, speaking, reading,and writing are incorporated into each NLA, ESL, or ELA instructional unit. Tasks related to literary texts require higher-order critical thinking. Teachers utilize culturally relevant and developmentally appropriate texts to scaffold the students’ understanding of the various literary genres. Teachers elicit personal responses to the literary texts in both oral and written form. Teachers use the writing process to develop LEP/ELLs’ ability to write in different genres and encourage students to relate literary texts to their personal experiences. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language, students are placed in native language arts classes and are evaluated by those teachers. Additionally, students take regents exams in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Service to ELL subgroups is provided on an individualized basis dependent on need. Tutoring, buddy groups, after-school programs, Saturday Academy instruction are available to assist students in need. Students with special needs are given supplementary instruction as per their IEP. In the case of SIFE students, we have not had many students who fall into this category. There have been cases where the students who were originally designated as SIFE have caught up and are now working at their correct grade level. When these situation do occur, we work on a case by case basis and provided tutoring and support for these students. For the entering level students, we offer 3 periods of English daily, well beyond the minimum number of instructional minutes required by the state. We stress listening skills, speaking skills, reading skills and writing skills. There is a strong focus on non-fiction work and literature. Long Term ELLs, and former ELLs receive individualized tutoring and meeting with their guidance counselors to ensure success. Teachers are successful at differentiating instruction for ELLs when they: • Get to know as much as possible about each student — ELLs represent a wide range of academic skills, interests, languages, English language proficiency levels, and cultures. The more a teacher can learn about each student's background, the better prepared s/he is to provide appropriate instruction for that student. • Have high expectations for all students — Content should not be "watered down" for students who are still developing 7  English language skills. Creative teachers think of ways to help students understand key material and "show what they know" in ways that match their language proficiency levels. • Have a variety of research-based instructional strategies at hand — Experienced teachers know that "one-size-fits-all" instruction is rarely successful. There are many different learning profiles in any given classroom, and students learn best when instruction matches their needs and learning styles. • Use ongoing assessment to guide instruction — Ongoing, informal assessment is vitally important to matching instruction to students' changing needs. • Provide multiple types of assessment — matching assessment to students' learning profiles and language proficiency ensures that every student has an opportunity to demonstrate what he/she knows. • Differentiate homework — If all students have the same homework assignments, some are doing busy work while others are struggling with work that they cannot possibly complete successfully (Tomlinson, 2005). • Collaborate — Instruction is most successful when all of the professionals who work with ELLs work together • Use flexible grouping — Small group instruction is a very effective way of making sure that all students can access important content, and keeping groups flexible allows teachers to match students with different peers for different types of activities. • Make content comprehensible for all students (Echevarria, Vogt, & Short, 2008) — Providing ELLs with alternative ways of accessing key content (e.g., charts, books written in their first language, simplified text written by the teacher, discussion, etc.) allows them to learn the same material as other students as they continue to develop their English language skills. Former ELLs recive mandated services for up to 2 years after exiting ELL status, provide Former ELLs testing accommodations on NYS assessments 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use grade appropriate materials to provide access to academic content areas and to accelerate English Language Development. These materials are based on the proficiency levels of the students . Students are programmed for classes based on their proficient levels on the NYSESLAT exam. We very diligently follow students IEPs and have ELL students in self contained classes, collaborative team teaching classes as well as in resource rooms. Students are tested every spring and letters are sent home to parents notifying them of the test. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In order to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment, students are programmed for their appropriate classes. Whenever possible, we aim to place students in as many general education classes as possible. Flexible programming is used to maximize the time spent with non-disabled peers and we ensure that all students have a lunch period for peer to peer socialization within the school day. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Tutoring is provided by each department in the content areas during the school day and after school. The Saturday Academy for ELL students provides supplementary instruction in ESL and ELA, Science and Social Studies. Native Language Arts classes are given in Chinese and Korean to support language acquisition skills of the second language. Specific students who need support (SIFE, Newcomers) are targeted, paraprofessionals are available to those who are eligible 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, we will be offering an after-school program in order to support struggling students as well as regents review sessions in multiple subject areas. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no programs for ELLs which will be discontinued. 8  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have equal access to school programs. Tutoring is available after school; counseling is offered in the afternoons; the Saturday Academy is specifically designated for supplementary instruction for ELLs. We also offer a Title III Summer School Program for ELLs. ELLs have the opportunity to participate in all school programs. Announcements are made over the loudspeaker, posters are posted on bulletin boards, teachers encourage students to become involved in their school community, a grade advisor for each grade tries to recruits students to join clubs/teams. There are many cultural clubs offered in the school with the goal of having all students become active members of their school community. ELLs are represented on sports teams, in clubs, on student counsels and have access to all programs just as all students at BHS have. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. A variety of instructional materials for ELLs, including textbooks, software, audio and visual aids, have been purchased for ESL classes as well as content area classes. The use of SMART Board technology well as Rosetta Stone and Castle learning has enhanced instruction. All subgroups have access to all materials. For lower level students or ELLS with disabilities, we have adapted versions of texts, realia, dictionaries. A resident artist will be coming to our title 3 Saturday program which will support our ELLS and SWD students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students are enrolled in language classes in their native tongue, which support language acquisitions. Materials are purchased to support instruction in their native language. Heritage speakers are programmed for foreign language classes. Students are provided with dictionaries and textbooks with built in enrichment for ELLs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Student support services provide counseling according to ELLs grade levels and ages. College information, scholarship and financial aid information and bulletins are provided to all juniors and seniors and information is provided to all students regarding graduation and diploma requirements. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Not Applicable 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, an Orientation is held in June to provide information regarding the school's policies, extra-curricular activities, clubs, teams and special services. Bilingual guidance counselors and the parent coordinator are available as well as a list of all staff members in the building who speak another language. The Translation and Interpretation Unit is an important part of the Department of Education's language access initiative which aims to enhance the organization's ability to communicate with and better engage limited-English-proficient parents of New York City school children. The Unit provides New York City public schools and offices with an internal resource for accessing written translation and oral interpretation services. The Unit is also responsible for spearheading all efforts related to language access, including, but not limited to: training and awareness of language access requirements and available resources, monitoring compliance, and oversight of earmarked, school-based translation funds. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs are given a Language Arts Class to assist them in the transition to our school. When their language proficiency advances, they may study one of the many languages offered at Bayside: Chinese as a Foreign Language, Korean as a Foreign Language, Spanish, French, Latin and Japanese. 9  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Faculty Conferences and Department Conferences cover many topics dealing with ESL methodology. Professional development training sessions for staff in all content areas including paraprofessionals, school psychologists and therapists: Differentiated Instruction for ELL students, Scaffolding, Technology in the ESL Classroom. Teacher, parent coordinators and secretaries may attend trainings when available and on professional development days, Assistant Principals receive professional development at trainings and during cabinet meetings. Faculty Conferences and Department Conferences cover many topics dealing with the common core. Professional development has been and will continue to be offered to all teachers of ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Standards. Planning conferences with Assistant Principals, peer intervisitations, webinars and individual conferences have been offered to all. Strategies are presented at department conferences to give teachers a greater awareness of the needs of incoming middle school students as they transition to high school. A Bridge Summer School program is available to middle school students to help them in transitioning to high school. Teachers are sent to trainings and are encouraged to share best practices with their colleagues. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. For English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Teachers from within the department conduct Professional Development to their colleagues in addition to PD presented by Assistant Principals. We also welcome professionals from outside of the building to present to the staff. Teachers are sent to PD workshops outside of the school conducted by the DELLS and the UFT. Teachers who attend PD outside of the building bring back material and turn key to their colleagues during PD sessions. All teachers sign in and records are kept on file at the school. Content area teachers attend PD ELL specific during monthly school meetings as well as on Full PD days in order to complete their required 15% of total PD hours for the year. 0  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The teachers/guidance counselors will individually meet with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year during the ELL Parent Night to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting will include school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English and in the child’s home language. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Bayside High School has an active Parent Teachers' Association, which meets on a regular monthly basis. Parents including ELL parents participate in all programs sponsored by the PTA including the School Leadership Team. Among the activities are the Multicultural events including the Korean Lunar New Year Festival, the Chinese Festival, Spanish Heritage Festival and the PTA Arts and Crafts Fair. We plan to continue our partnership with ArtsConnection by offering dance workshops in ELL specific classrooms for students in 9th through 12th grade. This program will be running simultaneously with our longstanding Title III Supplemental Weekend Instruction program. The Title III Supplemental Weekend Instruction program focuses on giving ELL students additional and extended su0pport and tutorials in the English Language Arts, Sciences and History. Through this grant, we hope to increase parent engagement among ELL populations and the wider community. We plan to invite families to two interactive and community building performances. Our primary goal is to promote meaningful engagement between families and the school, but also very importantly, to provide opportunities for fun, creative interaction between the diverse families that comprise our school community. The activities that ArtsConnection will be providing will support our objective of bringing together families who might never have the opportunity to meet, greet and enjoy each other's company. We have chosen two performance groups that will be scheduled to align with the Lunar New Year and Black History Month as a way to celebrate cultures and ethnicities represented in the school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Bayside High School is commited to high expectations for our ELL students. it is expected that every Bayside graduate will attend college and we provide challenging programs with caring teachers and support staff and a variety of extra curricular activities that assures that our graduates become well rounded adults. In addition to the academic requirements, we provide ELL students with instruction in native language arts. The goal of the program at Bayside HIgh School is to ensure that ELL students become proficient in English as quickly as possible thus allowing them to benefit from the resources available to them at the school. 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Michael Athy, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bayside High School School DBN: 26Q495 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Michael Athy Title Principal Shana Tessenholtz Assistant Principal Ivy Medina Arias Parent Coordinator Jessica Ostrowsky ENL/Bilingual Teacher Helen Moon Parent Dayana Jedretic Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Crystal Shim Lee School Counselor Juan Mendez Angela Bernaudo Jamie Hermel Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Lab/Besis Coordinator Other Related Service Provider Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 26Q495 School Name: Bayside High School Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lori Badalati-Parvis Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Results of the home language surveys were culled as was observations from the parent coordinator, teachers, guidance staff, supervisors and Lab Besis Coordinator. The outcome indicated translation needs in languages other than English, for parents of ELL students as well as parents of non-ELL students whose language is other than English. Collect data based on ATS home language as well as from the guidance counselor who has met with each student on his/her caseload. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 4  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ALBANIAN AMOY ARABIC BALANTE BENGALI CHAM CHINESE ANY CANTONESE DARI/FARSI/PERSIAN DUTCH GERMAN GUJARATI GREEK HAITIAN CREOLE HUNGARIAN HINDI INDONESIAN HAUSA KOREAN MACEDONIAN MALAY MANDARIN MOSSI MALAYALAM ENGLISH PASHTO PILIPINO PUNJABI NEPALI PORTUGUESE RUSSIAN SENUFO SINDHI SPANISH SIGN LANGUAGE TAMIL THAI TURKISH URDU UKRAINIAN VIETNAMESE 1 0 8 1 15 0 399 0 3 1 2 5 5 5 1 3 1 1 1 90 0 1 0 1 2 1323 2 3 12 1 3 3 1 1 287 0 1 1 1 10 2 3 0.05 0 0.36 0.02 0.68 0 18.19 0 0.33 0.04 0.09 0.1 0.23 0.23 0.05 0.14 0.04 0.05 0.05 4.1 0 0.05 0 0.05 0.09 60.33 0.09 0.14 0.55 0.05 0.14 0.14 0.05 0.05 13.09 0 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.46 0.09 0.14 1 1 2 1 15 1 310 13 22 2 1 6 12 6 1 3 2 1 1 93 1 1 81 1 3 1297 1 3 12 1 2 4 1 1 297 1 1 1 1 12 3 3 0.05 0.05 0.38 0.02 0.68 0.05 14.14 0.59 0.46 0.04 0.05 0.13 0.25 0.27 0.05 0.14 0.04 0.05 0.05 4.24 0.02 0.05 3.69 0.05 0.14 59.14 0.05 0.14 0.55 0.05 0.14 0.18 0.05 0.05 123.54 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.55 0.14 0.14 5  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not applicable Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families October Monthly Distributed as needed translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All translations are done by in-house staff. All translations are done by in-house staff. All translations New Student Handbook - in Fall College Handbook - in Fall Guidance Newsletter Miscellaneous documents including school papers and records from various countries - throughout the year 6  are done by in-house staff. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent Orientation Night Parent Teacher conferences in Fall and Spring IEP meetings Attendance Teacher phone calls Guidance staff phone calls. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? School Staff School Staff and if needed, the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be notified for assistance. School Staff and if needed, the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be notified for assistance. September October/November/ March Ongoing through school year Ongoing through school year Ongoing through school year School Staff 7  School Staff 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We inform all parents at the time of crisis. BHS utilizes the School Messenger telephone system which can record messages in different languages and inform the entire school population at home within 30 minutes. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members will be informed of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 at the first Faculty meeting on September 4, 2018. It will also be communicated via the weekly message which is published every Friday. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school will fulfill section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-663 regarding notification requirements translation and interpretation services by sending letters/flyers home and posting them on the school's website; conferences in native languages are held several times a year and a multi-language phone master is employed repeatedly. Notification documents are available on the Translation and Interpretation Unit's website for use. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? BHS consults with the PTA and SLT as to how to meet the needs of non-English speaking parents. Focus groups will be based on home language data per ATS reports. Feedback is gathered from teachers, guidance staff, parent coordinator and supervisors consistently. The Learning Environment survey is also a useful indicator. 8 
