 30Q580 School Name: BACCALAUREATE SCHOOL FOR GLOBAL EDUCATION Principal: KELLY JOAN JOHNSON   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Baccalaureate School for Global Education 343000011580 7-12 34-12 36 th Ave, Astoria, 11106 718-361-5275 School Number (DBN): 30Q580 718-361-5395 Fax: Phone Number: Kelly Johnson Kjohnso2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 30 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Kelly Johnson ShantanuSaha Trevor Harris MIchaelMehanand Leslie Greene N/A Sophia Rothman IsayahLawrence & Stella Andrianis Not Applicable District Information Elaine Lindsey Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place Elindse@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-3517 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens North Dr. Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kelly Johnson ShantanuSaha Trevor Harris Sophia Rothman IsayahLawrence & Stella Andrianis Leslie Greene Jeff Groner Daisy Avila *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Michael Mehan Jaime Meisler Nick Leahy MilenaMihalache Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Baccalaureate School for Global Education (BSGE) is a grade 7-12 school with the International Baccalaureate Diploma Program implemented school-wide. The school’s mission is to help sustain the global community by nurturing a spirit of imaginative and independent thinking, curiosity and mindfulness as we deepen our consciousness of global citizenship and respect for other cultures. We believe that our school community, through our thoughts and actions, can make the world a better place.   BSGE is a community of caring and principled thinkers who are open minded and balanced in our efforts to understand and respect each others’ differences; we reflect on our actions and approaches to learning, inquire instead of assume, strive to be knowledgeable, take risks to become agents of change, and work to effectively communicate our understanding as we collaborate around common goals. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Baccalaureate School for Global Education (BSGE) is a public school dedicated to the achievement of academic excellence and the development, in each student, of a positive self-image, love of learning, respect for others, and reverence for life. Our vision is the implementation of the curriculum frameworks and assessments of the International Baccalaureate Diploma Program in every classroom, to an ethnically, economically and intellectually diverse student body that reflects the diversity of New York CIty public schools. The Baccalaureate School for Global Education (BSGE) is an International Baccalaureate (IB), grades 7 -12, IB Diploma Program (DP) public school. The IB Diploma Program is an academically challenging and balanced program of education with cumulative assessments that prepare students, aged 16 to 19, for success at university and life beyond. It has been designed to address the intellectual, social, emotional and physical well being of students. The program has gained recognition and respect from the world’s leading universities. At BSGE, our Pre-IB Diploma Program covers grades 7-10 and is based on the principles and practices of the IB Diploma Program. The Pre-IB Diploma Program exposes students to a core curriculum that includes the following subjects: English, a foreign language (Mandarin and Spanish or Mandarin and French), humanities, science, math, visual arts, music, technology and 50-100 community and service hours. The DP spans grades 11-12 and affords students the opportunity to study six subjects in-depth. The courses offered at BSGE are Language A (English Literature), Language B (foreign language- Spanish, or French), History of the Americas, Chemistry or Biology, Math Studies or Mathematics, and Visual Arts or Technology. To qualify as an IB DP candidate, students must also fulfill approximately 100 Creativity, Activity and Service hours, complete a research paper (Extended Essay: 2500 – 4000 words), and take a Theory of Knowledge course (epistemology). BSGE has developed its systems and culture in order to support a coherent program, not only a series of advanced classes. We view student achievement through the lens of the whole child, not simply assessment data. At BSGE we ensure that students are supported in doing their best work. Partnerships and Collaborations: 0  The Baccalaureate School for Global Education (BSGE) is partnered with the International Baccalaureate Organization (IBO). This partnership provides BSGE with a consistent and unified academic focus for all constituents, a rigorous curriculum, teacher training (pedagogical and content-related), external grading of student assessments and student preparation for post-secondary education. The IBO supports the school educationally. Our other partnerships support the school by providing opportunities for students to fulfill the Creativity, Activity and Service (CAS) requirements of the IB Diploma, and by providing extracurricular activities and electives. These partnerships include: Socrates Sculpture Park — BSGE students engage in various volunteer opportunities at the park, including the annual Halloween Harvest, Summer Solstice, Bike Parade, Kite Flight and a full two-day Earth Day service event. Art-making workshops for 11th and 12th grade IB Diploma students are provided on site as well. Over the past four years, Socrates Sculpture Park has also partnered with our 7th grade Sarah Lawrence Creative Writing classes during the spring semester, combining a curriculum based on Isamu Noguchi’s artwork and writing narratives to produce a book and video of student creative work. Additionally, BSGE students intern during the summer at Socrates; BSGE alumni work as paid employees at the park, and are in charge of volunteer and youth programming. Sarah Lawrence Graduate Writing Program — Graduate students from Sarah Lawrence College work with 7th grade classes, teaching creative writing classes weekly throughout the year. The curriculum is tailored for 7th graders specifically with the intent of exposing students to a broad range of authors, writing techniques and different genres. Additionally, an after-school creative writing program for 7th graders is also conducted throughout the year in two ten-week sessions. Sunnyside Community Services Community Services — BSGE students engage in several volunteer opportunities with SCS. Students have volunteered at SCS’ main site and various other satellite programs at P.S. 150, P.S. 199 and I. S. 5, working with elementary school children in after-school programs as academic tutors, activity supervisors and mentors. BSGE’s Music Department performs two yearly concerts for the elderly members at SCS as well. The Noguchi Museum — BSGE students have participated in the “Making Your Mark” after school studio art program, which consists of twelve sessions that involve learning how to look at artwork, creating small bodies of work, and experiencing work with a variety of materials. BSGE students have also interned at the site, focusing upon projects and administrative duties. BSGE students have also been on Noguchi’s Teen Advisory Board; participants look at and discuss the art of Isamu Noguchi and other artists, and explore materials and different methods of artwork. Teens working with the Noguchi Museum assist the educational staff with outreach and program development. Elmhurst Hospital Center’s Child Life Program — Hospital Center’s Child Life Program — BSGE students work with staff members from Elmhurst Hospital’s Child Life Program. BSGE’s Helping Hands Committee Members facilitate a yearly toy drive for pediatric immunology patients at the site. Many of these patients are infected with HIV and/or AIDS. Through advisories, money is raised to purchase toys and gift cards in a “Secret Santa” format for the children in the 1  program. HHC members collect toys and donations from advisories, which are in turn picked up by Child Life staff. This has been a 14-year annual tradition. The IB Diploma Program core:  The Extended Essay asks students to engage in independent research through an in-depth study of a well-developed research question relating to one of the DP subjects they are studying.  Theory of Knowledge (ToK) develops a coherent approach to learning that unifies the academic disciplines. In this course on critical thinking, students inquire into the nature of knowing and deepen their understanding of knowledge as a human construction.  Creativity, Activity and Service (CAS) offers opportunities for students to engage in a range of activities alongside their academic studies throughout the Diploma Program. Creativity encourages students to participate in the arts and other creative activities. Activity promotes the development of a healthy lifestyle through physical activity. Service within the community offers a vehicle for new learning experiences with academic value. The three strands of CAS enhance students’ personal and interpersonal development through experiential learning and enable journeys of self-discovery. The IB Diploma Program curriculum: IB Diploma Program students must study one subject from each of the following five groups (Groups 1 - 5), ensuring breadth of knowledge and understanding in language and literature, a foreign language, the social sciences, the experimental sciences and mathematics. Students may choose either an arts subject from group 6, or a second subject from groups 1 - 5. At BSGE, due to New York State high school graduation requirements, students have the following choices within the 6 groups: Group 1: Language A: Literature Higher Level (HL) Group 2: Language B: French or Spanish Standard Level (SL) Group 3: Individuals and Society: History of the Americas HL Group 4: Experimental Sciences: Biology SL or Chemistry SL 2  Group 5: Mathematics: Mathematics SL or Mathematical Studies SL Group 6: The Arts or Technology: Visual Arts HL or Computer Science HL Aims and Assessment Objectives of the IB DP Core and Curriculum: Extended Essay (EE) — The Extended Essay is an in-depth study of a focused topic chosen from the list of approved Diploma Program subjects —normally one of the student’s six core subjects for the IB diploma. It is intended to promote high-level research and writing skills, intellectual discovery and creativity. It provides students with an opportunity to engage in personal research in a topic of their own choice, under the guidance of a supervisor (a teacher in the school). This leads to a major piece of formally presented, structured writing, in which ideas and findings are communicated in a reasoned and coherent manner, appropriate to the subject chosen. Theory of Knowledge (ToK) — ToK is a course about critical thinking and inquiring into the process of knowing. It is a core element, which all Diploma Program students undertake and to which all schools are required to devote at least 100 hours of class time. ToK and the Diploma Program subjects should support each other in the sense that they reference each other and share some common goals. The ToK course examines how we know what we claim to know. It does this by encouraging students to analyze knowledge claims and explore knowledge questions. A knowledge claim is the assertion that “I/we know X” or “I/we know how to Y”, or a statement about knowledge; a knowledge question is an open question about knowledge. A distinction between shared knowledge and personal knowledge is made in the ToK guide. This distinction is intended as a device to help teachers construct their ToK course and to help students explore the nature of knowledge. Language A: Literature HL The aims of the Literature HL course is to: Introduce students to a range of texts from different periods, styles and genres.   Develop in students the ability to engage in close, detailed analysis of individual texts and make relevant connections.  Develop the students’ powers of expression, both in oral and written communication.  Encourage students to recognize the importance of the contexts in which texts are written and received.  Encourage, through the study of texts, an appreciation of the different perspectives of people from other cultures, and how these perspectives construct meaning.  Encourage students to appreciate the formal, stylistic and aesthetic qualities of texts  Promote in students an enjoyment of, and lifelong interest in, language and literature.  Develop in students an understanding of how language, culture and context determine the ways in which meaning is constructed in texts.  Encourage students to think critically about the different interactions between text, audience and purpose. 3  Language B: French or Spanish SL The aims of the Language B course is to:  Develop students’ intercultural understanding.  Enable students to understand and use the language they have studied in a range of contexts and for a variety of purposes.  Encourage, through the study of texts and through social interaction, an awareness and appreciation of the different perspectives of people from other cultures.  Develop students’ awareness of the role of language in relation to other areas of knowledge.  Develop students’ awareness of the relationship between the languages and cultures with which they are familiar.  Provide students with a basis for further study, work and leisure through the use of an additional language.  Provide the opportunity for enjoyment, creativity and intellectual stimulation through knowledge of an additional language. Individuals and Society: History of the Americas HL The aims of the History of the Americas HL course is to:  Encourage the systematic and critical study of: human experience and behavior; physical, economic and social environments; the history and development of social and cultural institutions.  Develop in the student the capacity to identify, to analyze critically and to evaluate theories, concepts and arguments about the nature and activities of the individual and society.  Enable the student to collect, describe and analyze data used in studies of society, to test hypotheses and interpret complex data and source material. Promote the appreciation of the way in which learning is relevant to both the culture in which the student lives, and the culture of other societies.  Develop awareness in the student that human attitudes and opinions are widely diverse and that a study of society requires an appreciation of such diversity.  Enable the student to recognize that the content and methodologies of the subjects in Group 3 are contestable and that their study requires the toleration of uncertainty.  Promote an understanding of history as a discipline, including the nature and diversity of its sources, methods and interpretations.  Encourage an understanding of the present through critical reflection upon the past  Encourage an understanding of the impact of historical developments at national, regional and international levels.  Develop an awareness of one’s own historical identity through the study of the historical experiences of different cultures. 4  Experimental Sciences: Biology SL or Chemistry SL The aims of the Biology SL or Chemistry SL course is to:  Provide opportunities for scientific study and creativity within a global context that will stimulate and challenge students.  Provide a body of knowledge, methods and techniques that characterize science and technology.  Enable students to apply and use a body of knowledge, methods and techniques that characterize science and technology.  Develop an ability to analyze, evaluate and synthesize scientific information.  Engender an awareness of the need for, and the value of, effective collaboration and communication during scientific activities.  Develop experimental and investigative scientific skills  Develop and apply the students’ information and communication technology skills in the study of science.  Raise awareness of the moral, ethical, social, economic and environmental implications of using science and technology.  Develop an appreciation of the possibilities and limitations associated with science and scientists.  Encourage an understanding of the relationships between scientific disciplines and the overarching nature of the scientific method. Mathematics: Mathematics SL or Mathematical Studies SL The aims of all mathematics courses in group 5 are to enable students to:  Enjoy mathematics, and develop an appreciation of the elegance and power of mathematics.  Develop an understanding of the principles and nature of mathematics.  Communicate clearly and confidently in a variety of contexts.  Develop logical, critical and creative thinking, and patience and persistence in problem solving.  Employ and refine their powers of abstraction and generalization.  Apply and transfer skills to alternative situations, to other areas of knowledge and to future endeavors  Appreciate how developments in technology and mathematics have influenced each other.  Appreciate the moral, social and ethical implications arising from the work of mathematicians and the applications of mathematics.  Appreciate the international dimension in mathematics through an awareness of the universality of mathematics and its multicultural and historical perspectives.  Appreciate the contribution of mathematics to other disciplines, and as a particular “area of knowledge” in the ToK course. The Arts or Technology: Visual Arts HL or Computer Science HL The aims of the Visual Arts HL course is to enable students to:  Investigate past, present and emerging forms of visual arts. 5  Engage in producing, appreciating and evaluating works of art.  Develop an understanding of visual arts from a local, national and international perspective.  Build confidence in responding visually and creatively to personal and cultural experiences.  Develop skills in, and sensitivity to, the creation of works that reflect active and individual involvement.  Take responsibility for the direction of their learning through the acquisition of effective working practices. The aims of the Computer Science HL course is to enable students to:  Develop an appreciation of knowledge, methods and techniques of computer science. .  Demonstrate initiative in applying thinking skills in order to identify and resolve complex problems.  Understand the moral, ethical, social, economic and environmental implications of using science and technology.  Develop an appreciation of the possibilities and limitations associated with continued developments in IT systems and computer science.  Grasp the relationships between specific scientific disciplines and the overarching nature of the scientific method. Assessment: Students take written examinations at the end of the program, which are marked by external IB examiners. Students also complete assessment tasks in the school, which are either initially marked by teachers and then moderated by external moderators or sent directly to external examiners. The marks awarded for each course range from 1 (lowest) to 7 (highest). Students can also be awarded up to three additional points for their combined results on Theory of Knowledge and the Extended Essay. The diploma is awarded to students who gain at least 24 points, subject to certain minimum levels of performance across the whole program and to satisfactory participation in the Creativity, Activity, and Service requirement. The highest total that a Diploma Program student can be awarded is 45 points. Quality assurance and professional development: Any school, or group of schools, wishing to offer one or more International Baccalaureate programs as an IB World School must first be authorized. The requirements are the same for all schools, and the procedure is designed to ensure that schools are well prepared to implement the program(s) successfully. All IB World Schools are required to participate in an ongoing process of review and development, using the same program standards and practices. As part of its ongoing commitment to the development of a highly skilled global learning community, the IB provides a wide range of high-quality professional development opportunities to help new, experienced and expert school leaders and educators understand, support, and successfully deliver IB programs reflecting IB standards and practices. 6  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Each year BSGE receives students who join the IB program as ninth-graders, as well as special education students who are also new to the IB program. Families who are new to our school community require an introduction to the program’s curriculum and requirements, and they benefit from support in helping their children meet the demands of the IB program requirements. Both incoming ninth-graders and special education students require support in transitioning to a learning environment that closely resembles a collegial environment. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Rigorous Instruction, relative to our special needs population, is the element of the Framework for Great Schools that BSGE has made the most progress over the past year. As BSGE continues to provide opportunities for students in our inclusive environment, we have implemented flexible and creative structures of support and meet their needs. Evidence of our success in this area can be seen in students’ academic performance and their enrollment in our IB DP classes. 7  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q580 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 540 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 10 19 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 1 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 3 School Composition (2017-18) 43.0% % Attendance Rate 36.3% % Reduced Lunch 1.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 17.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 28.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.62 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 98.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 100% 100% 100.0% 70.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A N/A N/A 2 96.4% 5.9% 5.2% 3.7% 46.1% 4.6% 0 19% 6.1 100.0% N/A 100% 100% 100.0% 85% N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. On the Regents exams administered in June 2018, 95%-100% of BSGE students passed all exams. The 5% that did not were our the special education students. 2. We increased the enrollment of students from demographic categories under represented at the school. However Equity and Access remain an issue as the enrollment of families that identify as black is just 3.7% of the student population; lower than many other screened programs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. BSGE's goal around Rigorous Instruction is to sustain the school’s mission to offer the International Baccalaureate Diploma Program to a diverse student body by increasing the enrollment of populations currently underrepresented in the student body. 1. By the 2020 school year, the student body of BSGE will include an increase in the number of students from demographic areas in Queens currently under underrepresented at the school. BSGE will increase the enrollment of students in the identified districts by 10%. 2. In the 2018-19 school year, 50% of BSGE teachers will consistently implement modified lessons that target IB Diploma Program assessments and criteria. 3. In the 2018-19 school year 90% of the students in ICT classes will achieve an 85 or higher on the June Regents. 9  0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Focused class visits and observations targeting Planning, Designing Coherent Instruction and Engaging Students in Learning. Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 School administration PD addressing Planning, Designing Coherent Instruction and Engaging Students in Learning. Teachers & Staff PD addressing establishing clear Learning Outcomes and Objectives. All teachers October 2018-June 2019 PD Committee and School Administrators September 2018- June 2019 Instructional Cabinet and school administrators Monthly Meetings with ICT partners to establish a common understanding of expectations and responsibilities and provide support. ICT Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 School Administration and Sped Liaison Development of a diversity plan that includes working with the District Superintendent around outreach. School community SLT & Admissions Team September 2018 - February 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will be engaged via our Curriculum Night, IB Diploma Program Night, 9th Grade Welcome to BSGE, parent email and quarterly newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Identify teacher leads/ lead teachers, use of teacher team meetings, Instructional cabinet and Professional Assignments. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 1  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A midpoint benchmark will be January 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Class visits and observations will be used to measure the school's progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In the 2017-18 School Quality Review (SQR) it is noted that school needs to focus on is implementing formal structures for monitoring student progress and teachers as well as structures of support for both. A formal structure of monitoring student progress and supporting teachers is consistent with indicators of a Supportive Environment, an element of the Framework for Great schools. Consistent with the SQR assessment, on the student and family perception survey only 57% of our parents and students reported that they receive ‘personal attention and support’ and the school received just a score of 2.0 (Developing) in response to questions assessing the communication of expectations to students and staff; just 71% of school staff reported receiving clear expectations from the principal. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. BSGE's mission is to offer the IB Diploma Program, school-wide, to a diverse student body. Our goals in sustaining our mission that are aligned with this element of the Framework for Great Schools - Supportive Environment are:  Hire another Assistant Principal.  Establish and communicate expectations for teachers that support student learning.  Keep the school community informed about the IB process; progress of 11th a 12th graders.  Ensure families ae informed about expectations for students. - Revise and distribute student handbooks.  Keep families formed about their child's progress.  Establish a coherent structure for conducting teacher observations and providing feedback. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Advertise the elements of the IB program in the school building throughout the school year. Students and Family January 2019 Complete 'What is IB' handbook and community student handbook and put both on the school's website Students and parents January 2019 IB Diploma Program Coordinator & Tech Intern IB Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, Student Activities Coordinator and Grade Team Coordinators Establish a hiring committee Teachers June 2018 Principal Complete IB Power point and put on the school's website Students and families January 2019 Revise the teacher handbook. Teachers IB Diploma Program Coordinator, Tech Intern and students School Administration and IB Coordinator September 2018 - January 2019 Teachers August 2018 - June 2019 School Administration Teachers and Guidance Counselor September 2018 - November 2018 Principal Implement Cycles of Observations Implement one system for maintaining, documenting and communicating to parents their child's performance on assessments and academic behavior- Skedula 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be engaged via quarterly newsletters and parent meetings held by the IB Diploma Program Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 4  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources will include Teacher’s Professional Assignments, Faculty Conferences and summer work sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. October 2018, November 2018, January 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Class visits and observations, meeting agendas, one-on-one meetings with teachers and staff, observation calendar and monitoring use of Skedula. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. BSGE has consistently demonstrated success relative to student results on IB exams. This year the school either exceeded the world-wide average or matched the world-wide average on all IB Diploma Program assessments taken with the exception of Visual Arts. Since the majority of BSGE are not artistically gifted we recognize that while this subject permits some students the opportunity to shine not all students will. The ICT model has been recently implemented at BSGE. The challenge the school faces is preparing ICT students for the rigor and challenge of the IB Diploma Program. Ninety -eight percent of the students that failed a Regents exam were SWD students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our goals that address this element of the Framework for Great Schools-Collaborative Teachers are: 1. Fifty percent of the ICT students in next year's 11th grade class will take and at least one IB internal assessment in the 12th grade. Implement a Group 6 course as an alternate to Visual Arts 2. 3. 50-75% of the teachers will implement modified lessons. 4. Hire an additional Sped Ed teacher to support the creation of a Sped Ed lead and liaison. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development for teachers and administrators Teachers & Administrators Regular meetings with ICT partners Teachers Create opportunities for teachers to engage in vertical planning. Teachers Implement a hiring committee. Teachers October 2018n-May 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 Principal and AP Principal and AP Principal Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Meetings with parents to support both student and school goals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources will include teacher-team meetings, ICT teacher meetings, dissemination of PD opportunities published in the Principal’s Weekly and use of the Instructional team of Queens Plaza North. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7  January 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Class visits and observations with feedback and Advance ratings. Students’ performance on exams. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. This past year a number of educators joined the BSGE family and received inconsistent support. This is noted in class visits, observation notes and the NYC School Survey. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our goals to address this element of the Framework for Great Schools- Effective School Leadership are: 1. Establish and communicate teacher expectations 2. Develop structures of support for teachers. 3. Hire an Assistant Principal 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Revise/update and disseminate the Teacher Handbook Teachers Implement an Instructional Cabinet Hire an Assistant Principal Engage in one-on-one meetings with teachers and administrators. Teacher Teachers School Personnel Principal, AP & IB Coordinator Ap & Principal Principal Principal August 2018n- January 2019 October 2018 - 2019 September 2018 September 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Quarterly news letters informing families about what is taking place relative to this area of the framework. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources to achieve the goals in this element of Framework for Great Schools-Effective Leadership include professional assignments and Tax Levy funds to pay for per session hours during the summer. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 0  December 2018 and March 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Calendar of cycle of observations and class visits and a PD calendar that is public school-wide. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Eighty-five percent of the families that completed the NYC Survey reported positively in the area of Strong Family-Community Ties, however only 75% stated that they had that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our goals that address this element of the Framework for Great Schools- Strong Family and Community Ties are: 1. Communicate to parents, in a timely and consistent manner, their child's progress. 2. Inform parents about what their child is learning in class. 3. Ensure that families are aware of assessment deadlines for IB. 1. The implementation of an online grading system that parents can access independently. 2. Commuicating in 3. Quarterly newsletters that tell parents what’s going on in their child’s classroom. 4. New school website. 5. IB Diploma Program Student Handbook 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Quarterly news letters Parents Creating an IB Handbook for each high school grade Students Implement Skedula Parents and Students November 2018 - June 2019 December 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator Parent and IB Coordinator School Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources that will help us achieve our goals include Teachers’ Professional Assignments and the parent Coordinator. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A mid-point mark will be January 2019 3  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent survey and data showing parent participation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Consistently performing below standards, evidenced by low performance on formative assessments, and or a failing grade or 65 on summative assessments and progress reports. Consistently performing below standards, evidenced by low performance on formative assessments, and or a failing grade or 65 on summative assessments and progress reports. Consistently performing below standards, evidenced by low performance on formative assessments, and or a failing grade or 65 on summative assessments and progress reports. Consistently performing below standards, evidenced by low performance on formative Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Repeated readings, assistance revising work, provided supplemental scaffolding tasks Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one-to-one tutoring with the teacher and or peer tutoring. After theofficial school day Small group, one-to-one tutoring with the teacher and or peer tutoring. After theofficial school day Small group, one-to-one tutoring with the teacher and or peer tutoring. After theofficial school day Repeated reading for understanding of the questions or task, additional time to complete assistance revising work, provided supplemental scaffolding tasks. Repeated reading for understanding of the questions or task, assistance revising work, provided supplemental scaffolding tasks. Repeated reading for understanding of the questions or task, assistance revising work, provided Small group, one-to-one tutoring with the teacher and or peer tutoring. After theofficial school day 5  assessments, and or a failing grade or 65 on summative assessments and progress reports. Persistent poor performance on assessments, a change in academic performance and or a change in behavior. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) supplemental scaffolding tasks. Direct intervention by the Guidance Counselor. Group, one-to-one or family. intervention. During and or afterthe official school day. 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 3 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Additional supports as needed. The children will be given extended time to complete major assignments and will receive information about the resources available to all students i.e, access to computers before and after school. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We have three students according to ATS. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  Students are provided upon need, notebook, binder, paper and writing instruments. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. The school dd not receive additional funding for the number of reported students. 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 9  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 0  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Baccalaureate School for Global Education, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Baccalaureate School for Global Education will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 3  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Baccalaureate School for Global Education, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 4  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 5  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 6  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 7  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name The Baccalaureate School for Global Educ Borough Queens School Number 580 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kelly J. Johnson Coach NONE ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Not Applicable Teacher/Subject Area Not Applicable Related-Service Provider Not Applicable Superintendent Not Applicable Assistant Principal Maria Mamo-Vacacela Coach NONE School Counselor Christine Chaputian Parent Not Applicable Parent Coordinator Not Applicable Field Support Center Staff Member Not Applicable Other (Name and Title) Julia Noboa, Sup. School Aide C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 540 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 8 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.48% 9  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? NOT APPLICABLE 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? NOT APPLICABLE 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 0  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] NOT APPLICABLE 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NOT APPLICABLE 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. THIS INFORMATION IS NOT AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME. b. TBE program. If applicable. THIS INFORMATION IS NOT AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME c. DL program. If applicable. THIS INFORMATION IS NOT AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? THE SCHOOL PROGRAMMER AND GUIDANCE COUNSELOR WORK TO SCHEDULE STUDENTS ACCORDING TO INSTRUCTIONAL MANDATES. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. CURRENTLY THE SCHOOL HAS ONE STUDENT WITH LANGUAGE ACQUISiTION NEEDS PERTAINING TO COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT OF LANGUAGE. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? CURRENT ENL STUDENT'S HOME LANGUAGE IS ENGLISH THEREFORE NOT APPLICABLE. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. Long Term 1  e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status THIS INFORMATION IS NOT AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? IN CLASS GROUP DISCUSSION WITH SCAFFOLDING ACTIVITIES ARE USED TO PROVIDE ACCESS TO ACADEMIC CONTENT AREAS AND ACCELERATE ENGLISH LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWD ARE IN GENERAL EDUCATION CLASS. INSTRUCTION IS MODIFIED TO MEET ACADEMIC NEEDS. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. THIS INFORMATION IS NOT AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? THIS INFORMATION IS NOT AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? THIS INFORMATION IS NOT AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. THIS INFORMATION IS NOT AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. TEACHER GENERATED INSTRUCTIONAL TOOLS TARGETING THE INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE DIPLOMA PROGRAM ASSESSMENT THAT ARE TAKEN IN THE 11 TH AND 12 TH GRADES. THE ASSESSMENTS INCLUDE ORAL AND WRITTEN TASKS THAT ARE INTERNALLY AND EXTERNALLY SCORED. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? THIS INFORMATION IS NOT AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. THIS INFORMATION IS NOT AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? TEACHER GENERATED INSTRUCTIONAL TOOLS TARGETING THE INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE DIPLOMA PROGRAM ASSESSMENT THAT ARE TAKEN IN THE 11 TH AND 12 TH GRADES. THE ASSESSMENTS INCLUDE ORAL AND WRITTEN TASKS THAT ARE INTERNALLY AND EXTERNALLY SCORED. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). THIS INFORMATION IS NOT AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 2  THIS INFORMATION IS NOT AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? THIS INFORMATION IS NOT AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? THIS INFORMATION IS NOT AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME. THIS INFORMATION IS NOT AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. A STUDENT WITH DISABILITIES TEACHER AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT FOR STAFF. WHEREVER APPROPRIATE THE SERVICES OF THE BFSC ARE ENLISTED TO MEET THE PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS OF CR PART 154. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? THE GUIDANCE COUNSELOR MS. CHAPUTIAN MEETS WITH THE PARENTS/GUARDIANS AT THE BEGINNING OF THE SCHOOL YEAR TO DISCUSS THE PROGRAM, ITS GOALS AND STUDENT LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT NEEDS. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. THIS INFORMATION IS NOT AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NONE 3  4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kelly Joan Johnson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: BACCALAUREATE SCHOOL GL ED School DBN: 30Q580 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) KELLY J. JOHNSON Title Principal MARIA MAMO VACECELA Assistant Principal MARGARET PASACH Parent Coordinator CHRIS POTTER ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach CHRISTINE CHAPUTIAN School Counselor ELAINE LINDSAY Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member JULIA NOBOA Other SUP. SCHOOL AIDE Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q580 School Name: BSGE Superintendent: E. Lindsey The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Margaret Pasach Parent Coordinator Maria Mamo-Vacacela AP no no no no * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Families’ language preference is obtained from the Home Language Survey families complete upon enrolling their child. The responses are entered into a student data system, Automate the Schools (ATS), the language preference report is generated and that information is used to determine the school's target languages for parent written communication. That information will also inform the school about the translation our needs for Parent Teacher Conferences. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 7  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English ALBANIAN ARMENIAN ARABIC BENGALI BURMESE BULGARIAN CHINESE, ANY CANTONESE GUJARATI GREEK HEBREW HINDI INDONESIAN JAPANESE KOREAN MANDARIN NAHUATL NEPALI PUNJABI POLISH PORTUGUESE ROMANIAN SENUFO All parents have indicated English as the preferred language for oral and written communication. 2 1 2 35 1 2 37 0 1 2 1 3 4 1 3 0 1 3 3 6 4 1 2 0.38 0.19 0.38 6.58 0.19 0.38 6.95 0 0.19 0.38 0.19 0.56 0.75 0.19 0.56 0 0.19 0.56 0.56 1.13 0.75 0.19 0.38 2 1 3 39 1 2 33 1 1 3 1 4 4 1 5 2 1 3 2 5 4 1 2 0.38 0.19 0.56 7.33 0.19 0.38 6.2 0.19 0.19 0.56 0.19 0.75 0.75 0.19 0.94 0.38 0.19 0.56 0.38 0.94 0.75 0.19 0.38 8  SPANISH THAI URDU 41 1 2 7.71 0.19 0.38 39 1 2 7.33 0.19 0.38 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. N/A The Parent-Teacher Conference Announcement with having a 'Successful Meeting Tips' November 2017 November 2018 November 2019 The International Baccalaureate Diploma Guide. November 2017 N/A November 2018 November 2019 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 9  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Nights September 28, 2017 Last week of Sept 2018, and 2019 interpretation service(s)? International Baccalaureate Information Night College Application Process and Financial Aid Nights Community and Service nights Parent Teacher Conferences Spring Parent Teacher Conferences Spring Family Night Mid-Fall semester 2017, 2018 and 2019 The college advisor conducts additional meetings for parents by appointment. The college advisor conducts additional meetings for parents by appointment. The guidance counselor conducts informal telephone and face to face conferences with parents/guardians that support the whole child social - emotional development on an ongoing basis. The guidance counselor conducts informal telephone and face to face conferences with parents/guardians that support the whole child social - emotional development on an ongoing basis. Fall 11/16/17, 11/17/17 Fall 11/18 Fall 11/19 evening 5 - 8 pm, afternoon - 12:00 pm - 2:30 pm Spring Parent Teacher Conferences - 03/22/18,3/23/18 Spring 3/2019 Spring 3/2020 evening 5:00 - 8:00 pm, afternoon - 12:00 p, - 2:30 pm 5/24/18 5:00 - 8:00 pm May 2019 May 2020 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Send out an email to entire school community through parent coordinator. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 0  Faculty meeting Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Parent Coordinator is the designated staff member responsible for fulfilling this requirement. Using the data obtained from parent surveys about preferred languages she ensures that the Parents' Bill of Rights is available in the languages needed. This year we will mail the Parents' Bill of Rights to parents whose preferred language is other than English. Currently a link to the Parents' Bill of Rights, in English, is on the school website. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Written parent notices specifically written for the parent's preferred language. parent notices close to Parent Teacher Conference to identify a need for translation or interpretation prior to conferences. 1 
