 28Q686 School Name: QUEENS METROPOLITAN HIGH SCHOOL Principal: SAIDA RODRIGUEZ-TABONE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Queens Metropolitan High School 28Q686 342800011686 9 - 12 School Number (DBN): 91-30 Metropolitan Ave, Forest Hills, Queens, NY 718 286 - 3600 718 286 - 3601 Phone Number: Kim Ramazan Fax: Email Address: kramazan@queensmetro.com School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): SaidaRodriguez-Tabone Craig Scheiner Robert Kazanowitz and Charlie Agnello Wendy Karp NA student 1-HayleeKarp-Kazanowitz Student 2- Valentina Accardo CBO Representative: NA Geographical District: Q28 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Juan Mendez Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place, Room 307, Flushing, NY 11354 jmendez2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-286-7696 Phone Number: 718-281-7519 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 8201 RockawayBoulevard mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: 718-642-5863 Fax: 718-642-5874   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Michael Richman (10th grade rep) Member/ Parent  Name SaidaRodriguez-Tabone Craig Scheiner Robert Kazanowitz Darlene Viaggio NA Valentina Accardo (senior rep) Destiny Vergara(junior rep) HayleeKarp-Kazanowitz (senior rep alt) Frank Swetten Joshua Huffaker *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Crystal Pena (11th grade rep) Wendy Karp (12th grade rep) Monica Carroll (9th grade rep) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Jack Hernandez (Alt Junior Rep) Student Representative Charlie Agnello Katherine Stalford PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Queens Metropolitan High School’s Mission and Core Values. Section 4: CEP Overview MISSION STATEMENT: Queens Metropolitan High School is a college preparatory school with the mission of preparing 100% of our students to be accepted to and graduate from a college or career of their choice.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. At Queens Metropolitan High School we focus on providing our students with a well-rounded education that prepares them for life after high school. We offer Advanced Placement classes (English Literature, English Language, US History, European History, Calculus, Computer Science Principles, Government and Biology) as well as College Now classes that allow students to earn college credit. Additionally, our students participate in college preparation classes called College 99, College 100, College 101 and College 102. In these classes, students learn everything they need to know about choosing the best college, applying to college, completing financial aid paperwork, writing college essays, and securing recommendations. All Queens Metropolitan High school students take at least one college trip per year in order to determine which college will be the perfect fit. CORE VALUES: Our staff is committed to teaching students to care about the community within our school as well as the outside community. Through the Common Culture Guide, teachers and staff create a school environment that is conducive to student learning. Teachers are accountable for monitoring their students’ progress and for teaching students to be responsible for their well being and education. We ask each student in our school to embody the school community’s Core Values: Citizenship, Leadership, Scholarship and Relationship. School’s strengths from the past year: The core elements of the Framework for Great Schools are built into the fabric of our school culture. ● School leaders regularly gather and analyze summative, quarterly interim assessments and classroom level assessment data to determine strengths and evaluate student progress. ● The school’s yearly ‘Common Culture Guide’ allows for consistency and professionalism across classrooms through school-embedded rituals that hold students accountable for learning. ● School leaders and teachers use quarterly interim assessment cycles to track student progress and adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. ● School leaders and teachers engage in professional collaborations that foster reflection and growth as well as provide options for school-wide instructional decisions that focus on improving student achievement. ● Use of rubrics and common assessments across classrooms and grades provides actionable feedback for teachers and students that informs instructional and curricular adjustments. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  Our school's special populations include over 250 students with IEPs. The majority of these students receive ICT services. Out weighted diploma rate for students with IEPs is significantly higher than the city average, yet we need to continue to improve our college readiness rate for students with IEPs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Quality Review Area of Focus: ● The consistent integration of the instructional shifts and rigorous tasks across grades: Teachers do have curriculum maps aligned to the Common Core. However, these maps need to consistently meet the individual needs of all students in all departments. More coherence is needed to improve the opportunities for all students to produce work products that demonstrate high levels of thinking and engagement. ● Pedagogically build more conceptual understanding among students leading students to be more aware of their actual knowledge. To continue to provide and develop opportunities for students to participate in “productive struggle” in the classroom and in the school community as a whole. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q686 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1091 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 52 49 7 28 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 24 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 60.0% % Attendance Rate 50.5% % Reduced Lunch 3.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 44.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 41.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.18 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 90% 85% 79.9% 26.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YSH NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES No N/A 200 192 91.4% 9.7% 16.0% 3.3% 9.9% 0.9% 8 46% 4.9 N/A N/A 90% 83% 94.1% 38% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A YES N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● The 2014-2015 Quality Review rating of “Proficient” in Quality Indicators 1.1 Curriculum and 1.2 Pedagogy indicate the need for building more conceptual understanding among our students where they are required to critically think and analyze at a college level. The 2015 Quality Snapshot specifies that 53% of our students graduated college ready. Furthermore, the 2015 School Quality Guide stipulates that, 47% in Integrated Algebra and ELA met the college ready threshold in the Regents. Although our graduation rate was 92% in 2014/2015 only 20% of graduates received an Advanced Diploma. In order for more of our students to excel and be college ready, we as a school community need to consistently integrate the instructional shifts and rigorous tasks that push all students in all grades. Strengths: ● The creation of “Capstone” government course to ensure that 12th grade students are required to gain mastery in writing and presenting a college level research paper. ● Specifically targeted faculty and professional development facilitated by lead teachers that address our areas of instructional focus: Question and Discussion techniques (3b), Engaging Students in Learning (3c) and Using Assessment in Instruction (3d) and writing across all content areas. ● Developed a common CCSS rubric in ELA to assess students’ writing. Needs: ● Develop school wide common literacy strategies and common rubrics to strengthen student reading and writing in non fiction. ● Create teacher lead positions to support other teachers integrate the instructional shifts in their learning experiences. ● Provide professional development aligned to the “rigorous instruction” goal to make sure all teachers have the skills to teach literacy in their subject areas. ● Provide on going coaching to departmental and grade leads to run effective data meetings based around our literacy goals. 3  ● To increase the amount of high quality text (or multiple texts) used by all teachers in Humanities and Science. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the college-readiness index will increase by 3% for all students, as evidenced by the scores on the English Regents Examination and Algebra I Regents Examination. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Targeted professional development - Led by Teacher Leads, Admin, Outside coaches based on needs of students and teachers as demonstrated by teacher observations, walkthroughs, summative and interim data Targeted Coaching - Led by Teacher Leads, Admin, Outside coaches based on needs of students and teachers as demonstrated by teacher observations, walkthroughs, summative and interim data Common Planning and Departmental Time – creation of unit, lesson plans and strategies from each subject area based on data from the observations, walkthroughs, summative and interim data (aligned to the CCSS) Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Sept 2018 – June 2019 All students Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin, teacher coaches, department heads, grade heads Admin, coaches, outside coaches All students Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin, whole faculty Targeted Common Core Parent Outreach/Workshops Parents Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin, whole faculty, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. To enable families to do these things, faculty will work with families to set ambitious goals and monitor and support progress toward those goals. This includes: Working collaboratively with families to set goals and foster high expectations for student achievement. Showing families what children are learning, and demystifying grade-level standards and assessments. Using data to show families how their children are doing. Helping families support learning at home. 5  Trust among faculty and parents is an important predictor of school performance. In order to engage parents in learning, teachers and school staff need trusting, mutually respectful relationships with families that are reinforced by consistent, two-way communication systems. To build these relationships, faculty will: Treat families in respectful and culturally sensitive ways and welcome their engagement in the classroom. Establish a meaningful, differentiated home–school communication system. Be able to reach all families and be reached by all families in a timely way. Communicate with all families in a way that is accessible and easy to understand. Problem-solve with families in positive ways. Learn from and about families to improve learning in the classroom. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Interim Assessments, Regents data, Scholarship Report, Per Session to pay Department Leaders, Peer Collaborative Coaches Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Data on our January 2019 Interim Assessments will show a 5% increase in ENL and SWD students scoring at the college ready level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Interim Assessments and Regents Exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? After careful review of the School Quality Snapshot 2018, 92% of students indicated that they feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, lock rooms and cafeteria. 76% feel that Queens Metropolitan High school establishes a culture where students are challenged to grow and supported to meet high expectations. Therefore, after a needs assessment was conducted and a review of our School Quality Guide, internal data shows that only 50% of the students say that teachers support them when they upset. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 70% of the students will indicate on the school-developed student survey that they agree they can identify an adult in the school with whom they may meet to address a problem or concern. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Targeted professional development - Led by Teacher Leads, Admin, Outside coaches based on needs all subgroups.(whole faculty, departmental) all teachers Sept 2017 – June 2018 Admin, Teacher Leads, Dept. Heads The PBIS team, which will meet on a once on a monthly basis to assist and support PBIS implementation, inclusive of data analysis and ongoing communication to staff. In addition to addresing students social-emotional learning of all students. ALL Sept 2017 – June 2018 Admin, Teacher Leads, Dept. Heads, guidance counselors, social workers, nurse, etc. Common Planning and Departmental Time – creation of scaffolded lesson plans and strategies from each subject area (based on data from the observations, walkthroughs, summative and interim data) to meet the need of all students Grade Team - Use grade team time to assess data collected on ELL, SWD and our “most at risk” students to continue to discuss and create actions plans around differentiated strategies and support ELL and SWD subgroups Sept 2017 – June 2018 Admin, Teacher Leads, Dept. Heads ELL and SWD subgroups Sept 2017 – June 2018 Admin, Teacher Leads, Grade Heads 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Trust among faculty and parents is an important predictor of school performance. In order to engage parents in learning, teachers and school staff need trusting, mutually respectful relationships with families that are reinforced by consistent, two-way communication systems. To build these relationships, faculty will: Treat families in respectful and culturally sensitive ways and welcome their engagement in the classroom. Establish a meaningful, differentiated home–school communication system. Be able to reach all families and be reached by all families in a timely way. Communicate with all families in a way that is accessible and easy to understand. Problem-solve with families in positive ways. 8  Learn from and about families to improve learning in the classroom. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for Lead ELL teacher to run PD and extra support in the A.M. for ELLs. Monday and Tuesday PD for teachers to collaborate around strategies to improve student performance. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of the First Semester, 90% of our ELLs and students with IEPs will accumulate at least 5 credits for the semester. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● The 2014-2015 Quality Review deemed our Teacher Teams and leadership development as “well developed”. In order to reach our goals in “rigorous instruction” and “supportive environment” we need to continue to improve the effectiveness of teacher collaboration in common planning, professional development ,dept. and grade team time. Needs: Provide each teacher with the instructional support and guidance to create at least one unit plan that ends with a research based product that incorporates the Common Core benchmarks. Provide coaching for teacher leads, dept. and grade team heads in facilitative leadership around the creation of rigorous/scaffolded units and lesson plans. Create a calendar for admin, lead teachers to meet and support teachers during common planning time. Conduct regular walk throughs of all classes starting from September and survey teachers to find out needs for professional development opportunities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 70% of the students will indicate on the school-developed student survey that they agree they can identify an adult in the school with whom they may meet to address a concern. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Common Planning and Departmental Time – creation of unit, lesson plans and strategies from each subject area based on data from the observations, walkthroughs, summative and interim data (aligned to the CCSS) All teachers Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin, Teacher Leads, Dept. Heads Coaching and Monitoring of Teacher Leads, Dept. and Grade Heads. Lead teachers/Admin Sept 2018 – June 2019 Principal, AP Instructional Leads Continuous professional development/Coaching highlighting the instructional shifts and scaffolding for ELL and students with disabilities All teachers Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin, Teacher Leads, Dept. Heads 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will meet during common planning where they exchange ideas, analyze student work, examine data and review the common core learning standards and the career development occupational standards, in order to plan, act, implement, reflect, adjust and share best pedagogical practices. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for Department Leaders to train teachers in writing rigorous, CC aligned units. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1  By June 2019, QMHS will establish partnerships with at least three local not-for-profit organizations in an effort to reinforce our four Core Values (Relationship, Citizenship, Scholarship, and Leadership) by continuing to strengthen our relationship with the community. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Google Folders by department and teacher subjects submitted to our department leaders Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● This year we have added an Honors Italian course, AP Biology, an SAT prep course for students. This year school leaders have emphasized accountability for student attendance through targeted bi-monthly attendance team meetings. Moreover, grade teams have attendance and credit goals for subgroups of students, all of which have been monitored throughout the academic year. Need: ● To continue to improve the effectiveness of the administrative team to coach and evaluate teacher performance based on the Danielson rubrics. ● To increase the leadership capacity of the staff by creating teacher lead positions that support their peer teachers in their instruction towards the specific goals of the CEP. ● To continue to coach grade and departmental heads to effectively facilitate teacher collaboration, working towards the goals set in the CEP. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administrators and teachers participate in interim-assessment data meetings, which will entail the analysis of academic data by subgroup, the identification of students’ needs, and the creation of SMART goals to address the needs. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Coaching and Monitoring of Teacher Leads, Dept. and Grade Heads. Teacher Leads Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin Outside Professional Development – Principal to attend the Paul Bambrick’s “National Principals Academy Fellowship” – In order to turn key key aspects of the program to improve the coaching and evaluation of our teachers - APs and Teacher Leads to attend instructional leadership PD opportunities with the DOE Calendar a cycle of Rigorous Instruction walk throughs for the admin team to norm the Danielson rubric and assess level of rigor in the classrooms Admin, Teacher Leads Sept 2018 – June 2019 Principal Admin/teachers Sept 2018 – Admin June 2019 Provide continuous professional development aligned to the goals set in the CEP Teachers Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin, Teacher Leads, 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Trust among faculty and parents is an important predictor of school performance. In order to engage parents in learning, teachers and school staff need trusting, mutually respectful relationships with families that are reinforced by consistent, two-way communication systems. To build these relationships, faculty will: Treat families in respectful and culturally sensitive ways and welcome their engagement in the classroom. Establish a meaningful, differentiated home–school communication system. Be able to reach all families and be reached by all families in a timely way. Communicate with all families in a way that is accessible and easy to understand. Problem-solve with families in positive ways. Learn from and about families to improve learning in the classroom. 4  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for PD for APs and coaches and funds for 2 Peer Collaborative Teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 80% of teachers will have a rating of 3 or higher in Advance by the end of January. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2018 High School Quality Snapshot stipulated that 97% of parents say that school staff work closely with families to meet student needs. Need: 85% of parents responded positively to questions about Strong Family-Community Ties. We will invite all parents to at least 5 schoolwide events, including PTA meetings, family field days, college visits, and awards ceremonies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will increase parent involvement in school-wide activities and conferences by 10% as measured by attendance data and the results of the DOE Learning Survey. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Workshops – College Process (10 th to 11 th grade, 11 th to 12 th grade), Common Core Cafes (What is it? What can you do to support your child?) parents Orientations parents Senior – Getting College ready – Parent and student introduction to 12 th grade capstone courses, and professional expectations QMHS holds its senior students to Freshman – transition to high school. 1 st year expectations, graduating requirements, documentation and overview of school and schedule Sept 2018 – June 2019 Sept 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator, College Advisors, Teacher Leads Admin, Lead teachers, Dept and grade Heads in 9 and 12 th grades Events 9 th Grade Research Roundtables 12 th Grade Research Paper - Roundtables Parent Conferences PTA Events SLT Parent Invites 3b – Parent and Family Engagement parents Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin, Lead teachers, Dept and grade Heads in 9 and 12 th grades parents Sept 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Admin, PTA If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Translation services to reach out to parents who do not speaking English. Per session for teachers to stay after school for more parent events. 7  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January, 73% of parents will have been invited to at least 2 events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Email, phone records, mailing postage reports and attendance sheets at events Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Student grades, data assessment, Teacher referral Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Saturday School Regents Prep After School Tutoring Student grades, data assessment, Teacher referral Student grades, data assessment, Teacher referral Student grades, data assessment, Teacher referral Student grades, data assessment, Teacher referral Wilson Program Saturday School Regents Prep After School Tutoring Saturday School Regents Prep After School Tutoring Saturday School Regents Prep After School Tutoring Individual Counseling by Social Worker and Guidance Counselors Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group tutoring Saturdays Small group tutoring After School Wilson – during the school day Saturdays After School Small group tutoring Saturdays After School Small group tutoring Saturdays After School Small group tutoring Saturdays After School During the School Day 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0 To meet any available needs of the student and family, including school supplies. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $1415 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 15,105 TBA TBA 12,366 7,418,208 X X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 3  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  4   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Queens Metropolitan High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Queens Metropolitan High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 6  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 7  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Queens Metropolitan High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of 8  student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 9  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 0  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 1  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 37 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our primary focus is to provide our ELLs with support in their content areas. This will be done in ESL classes, in content classes, and in after-school tutoring. This additional support will be put in place with the goal in mind to improve student achievement. ELLs will demonstrate academic improvement as evidenced by their passing scores in content area classes and on content area Regents Exams. The results of analyzing the data indicates that 60.6% of our ELL's have not taken the Algebra regents or have not achieved a college readiness score; 84.4% of our ELL's will be taking the English and the new Global regents; 63.6% will be taking the Living Environment Regents this June 2019; 51.5% are designated as the bottom 1/3 in terms of performance as per city data; and 30% are considered at risk of not graduating on time due to regents performance. In addition, 48.5% of our students and families speak Spanish and 22.7 speak Chinese. Therefore, this years TIII program will target these areas by implementing the program described below: All entering, emerging, and transitioning students are scheduled for 9th period homework help on Wednesdays and Thursdays after school for one hour each day. All expanding students are scheduled for homework help for one of those days as well, with the option to come on the other day as needed. A google sheet has been made with all students' names on it and a space for each class. This has been shared with teachers so that they can advise us of specific tasks or assignments that students need to work on. Additionally, teachers leave hard copies of assignments in the ENL teachers' mailboxes. The room has been furnished with books for multiple subject areas, computers to complete assignments, and we have access to laptop carts if needed. Our goal in this program is to support out students in all of their classes. This benefits them because many do not have computers in the house or English speakers at home to help them with homework. We provide them with support from the ENL teachers and former ENL students who come to assist students with support in their native languages as well. The after-school program will focus on tutoring and helping students with tasks and skills for English, the new Global Regents Global History, US History, Math, and Science classes. The teachers will work with students on homework, essay-writing, and strategies for academic success and language acquisition. By having two certified ESL, one mathematics and a Science teachers in the room at the same time, we will be able to focus on the needs of students of all proficiency levels. Our two ESL teachers will gather resources from teachers of all subjects in the school to furnish the program with books, handouts, and other materials necessary to support our students. Additionally, laptops and iPads will be available for use and each student will be given an electronic translator to use. This program will take place on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 2:20 to 3:30. 4  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: N/A - Funding is being used entirely for afterschool program. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents/Guardians of English Language Learners need to be provided assistance and services in their home language. Recognizing this need, Queens Metropolitan High School will hold workshops specifically for our families, whose home languages are Spanish or Chinese; which are the two largest home language groups. Workshops will assist parents/guardians in motivating and assisting their children to meet high school requirements and to insure college preparedness. Each term, Fall and Spring, ESL Coordinator and Guidance Counselors will hold a workshop/meeting for each language group, Spanish and Chinese. The topics of the workshop/meeting will include How to Understand Graduation Requirement and High School Records; How to Access Student and School Information via Pupil Path; and How to Communicate with Your Child and the School to Improve Academic Achievement. Each term, the College Counselors will hold a meeting/workshop for parents/guardians of ELLs. The topics will include How to Begin the College Application Process. At all workshops/meetings, the workshops will either be conducted in the parents/guardians home language or translation will be provided. Parents/Guardians of ELLs will be notified in various mediums. Flyers in home languages will be distributed in classes and mailed home. The phone master will be used in the home languages. Information will be posted on the school’s website. Guidance Counselors and College Counselors will outreach to parents/guardians in their caseload. 5 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. We are using this funding to pay for the after school program to support our growing ENL population. NA This will be used to purchase supplies, snacks and pay for trips for our students N/A N/A N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $10000  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA $2366 N/A N/A NA 12,366 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Queens District 28 School Name Queens Metropolitan High School School Number 686 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Saida Rodriguez-Tabone Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Christopher Kelly Teacher/Subject Area NA Teacher/Subject Area NA Related-Service Provider Lori Kalman/Social Worker Superintendent Juan Mendez Assistant Principal Tori Raysor Coach School Counselor Joanna Gonzalez Parent Miriam Janeiro Parent Coordinator Kim Ramazan Field Support Center Staff Member Pierre Galvez Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics 7  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1064 Total number of ELLs 25 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.35% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Lang. NA NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses the 8th grade ELA exam results to assess the literacy skills of our ELLs. Our analysis revealed that all of our students scored either a 1 or 2 for their reading levels in 8th grade. 89% of our population scored a 1 and 11% scored a 2 on the 8th grade ELA exam. This data supports the need to target instruction to improve reading comprehension skills. Because of this, in our ENL and content area classes, we are focusing on reading strategies, such as paraphrasing, annotations, central idea, forming questions from readings, and note-taking. Further, we have implemented a school-wide annotation policy so that all students, including ELLs, will use the same method of annotation for each class. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 8  we have implemented a school-wide annotation policy so that all students, including ELLs, will use the same method of annotation for each class. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use different criteria to evaluate the success of our ENL program. In addition to analyzing the data of the NYSESLAT exams, we also look closely at students’ credit accumulation and regents exam pass-rates. Twice per year, we administer an interim assessment. The first assessment is used as a baseline and the second is used to measure progress. These help to inform instruction and they help us to predict proficiency levels for the upcoming year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? we administer an interim assessment. The first assessment is used as a baseline and the second is used to measure progress. These help to inform instruction and they help us to predict proficiency levels for the upcoming year. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: The first assessment is used as a baseline and the second is used to measure progress. These help to inform instruction and they help us to predict proficiency levels for the upcoming year. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data from last year’s NYSESLAT shows that the vast majority of our students move up at least one proficiency level from year to year. Since the proficiency levels have changed between 2014 and 2015 (from B/I/A/P to En/Em/Tr/Ex/Cm), we look at students’ original NYSITELL scores to gauge if beginners were originally entering or emerging in proficiency. Last year, we had 17 of our students pass the NYSESLAT with a score of commanding. Seven of those students made a jump to commanding from intermediate and one jumped from beginner to commanding. Of the students who did not pass the NYSESLAT, we had three students go from beginner to Emerging; three students who stayed at the same proficiency level (beginner-entering[2] and advanced-expanding [1]); four students went from intermediate to expanding; one student went from beginning to expanding; one student went from beginner to transitioning; and one student went from intermediate to expanding. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We disseminate these findings and results during common planning meetings Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Entering and Emerging students are given freestanding ENL instruction for 1-2 periods per day. They are grouped by proficiency level with all grades in one class. All proficiency levels are placed in ELA classes with Mr. Kelly and Ms. Bivona co-teaching with the ELA teachers. Students are integrated into classes with non-ELLs of their same grade levels and receive support from the ENL teachers. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. 9  Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The content areas classes are delivered in English with native language support through the use of glossaries, bilingual dictionaries, translators, and when possible, materials in the native languages. Glossaries and bilingual dictionaries are available for all teachers for use in their classes. In addition to this, teachers use SIOP (Sheltered Instruction Operational Protocol) methodologies to support the learning of all of their students. These strategies are especially helpful to ELLs and do not take away from instruction for other students. These methodologies include, but are not limited to visual cues, writing prompts, sentence starters, flexible grouping, explicit instruction of vocabulary, and presenting information in multiple modalities. Mr. Kelly works with the program office to insure that students are placed in freestanding and push-in classes and that all students are receiving the appropriate number of instructional minutes, if not more. In the beginning of the year, a line schedule of all ENL students is checked to be sure that any program changes made did not take away from the mandated number of instructional minutes of ENL to which students are entitled. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content areas classes are delivered in English with native language support through the use of glossaries, bilingual dictionaries, translators, and when possible, materials in the native languages. Glossaries and bilingual dictionaries are available for all teachers for use in their classes. In addition to this, teachers use SIOP (Sheltered Instruction Operational Protocol) methodologies to support the learning of all of their students. These strategies are especially helpful to ELLs and do not take away from instruction for other students. These methodologies include, but are not limited to visual cues, writing prompts, sentence starters, flexible grouping, explicit instruction of vocabulary, and presenting information in multiple modalities. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Because we only provide ENL instruction here, we do not regularly evaluate ELLs in their native languages. We do, however, evaluate incoming Spanish-speaking students using the LAB-R in Spanish. In addition to this, students are given the option to take exams in their native languages and, when available, exam materials are given to the students in their native languages. We believe in using the native language as a support for students' English acquisition whenever possible. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Any student identified as SIFE will receive further support with literacy via adapted texts and push-in support, homework help before school on Mondays and Tuesdays and after school on Wednesdays and Thursdays, as well as counseling as needed. We focus most on meta-cognitive strategies and study skills. In tutoring and in class, we work with students to help them learn effective note-taking, methods to study, and ways to help themselves understand and retain what they read. These are skills that we focus on with all students, but we place particular emphasis on these skills with students who have not had consistent prior schooling. b. At admission, each newcomer is interviewed and their needs are assessed. We use this information in scheduling and placement. We often find that our newcomers test at higher levels because they have taken English in their home countries and subsequently score higher on the reading and writing sections of the NYSITELL. These students need particular support with listening and speaking, which impacts them greatly in their content classes. Because of this, we offer students support before and after school and sometimes place them in an additional ENL classes for their first semester. Newcomers that test 0  at an entering/emerging level are placed in an ENL class and in ELA classes with a push-in ENL teacher. Additionally, they are placed in support classes before and after school for help with homework, vocabulary, and grammar. We also offer native language support and we maintain constant communication between the newcomers’ content teachers and the ENL teachers. We believe that it is very important to support newcomers, but also to support the teachers of the newcomers in providing the best instruction possible. c. We recognize that students who have been here for 4-6 years have different needs than newcomers. We look at each student individually to assess their language needs, using the NYSESLAT results and other data. These students receive most of their instruction in ELA classes with an ENL teacher providing support. To assist these students, the ENL teachers plan with the ELA teachers to make sure that each component of the lesson is scaffolded to make the lesson objective attainable for the developing ELLs. d. Former ELLs receive further support via ENL teachers in their ELA classes, as well as the accommodations afforded to them on exams throughout the year, in class and Regents exams. Teachers are e-mailed a list of ELLs and former ELLs at the beginning of the year, advising them that students should get time and a half on exams, as well as the use of glossaries, translators, and other language supports. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The teachers of ELL-SWDs use engaged, new visions and also differentiate the process, content, and product so that all students have the opportunity to achieve academic competency and success. They do this through adapted texts, the teaching of meta-cognitive skills, multiple versions of assessments, sentence starters for writing, and various other strategies to differentiate instruction. Accommodations are made for the students in all aspects of instruction and assessment. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school is an inclusive school with SETTS, ICT, and self-contained classes. The IEP committee completes a comprehensive evaluation for our ELL-SWDs to make a recommendation for the least restrictive environment. All instruction and assessments are delivered according to the recommendations of the IEP committee. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. -Push-in ENL teachers in ELA classes for all grades. -After-school tutoring in all content areas for all sub-groups, Wednesdays and Thursdays in room 3021 -Entering/Emerging students get ELA support in their ENL classes, using articles from Newsela.com to deliver content at different reading levels -Students are scheduled for more than the minimum mandated minutes of instruction per week by scheduling them for period zero support and period nine support. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue to schedule students as in the past and by having ENL students push in to ELA classes. We continue placing students in extra ENL classes before school and after school to support them in their content classes, language acquisition, and to assist them with homework. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? In order to meet the new state mandates, we are unable to provide push-in services in Global History classes. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We are aware that it is very important that our ELLs have the same access to our school programs as other students. Our school has many clubs and sports, as well as tutoring and other after-school activities. ELLs are encouraged to attend these programs that interest them and the announcements are made available to the ENL teachers for clarification. Additionally, our 1  parent coordinator sends e-mails to students’ parents advising them of school events and activities and parents are advised to e-mail Mr. Kelly for clarification and/or translation. Additionally, ELLs have their own tutoring program that coincides with the school-wide after-school homework program. They have a choice to go to either program for extra help and support. We also have events that are exclusively for ELLs, such as the ENL Family Dinner that we have in the Spring. This was so successful last year that we are considering having one in the first semester of this year as well. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We are aware of the potential for technology to aid in language development and acquisition. Each classroom in the school is furnished with a Smartboard and projector and each teacher is given a laptop and an iPad. The iPads can be given to students for adapted texts, translation, or alternate assignments. The Smartboard Notebook Software, as well as PowerPoint, can be used for visuals, video clips, and manipulation in ways that a standard chalkboard or whiteboard cannot. Additionally, we have seven laptop carts and an iPad cart that can be checked out and used in any class. Last year, we also purchased a number of electronic translators, some of which are state-approved for use during Regents Exams. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In all content areas, there are measures taken to give native language support to ELLs. Though not all teachers speak other languages, bilingual glossaries are available in the subject areas, as well as dictionaries and electronic translators. We also have a large number of staff who speak other languages; these staff members can be used for support, translation, and parent outreach. Teachers also work with Mr. Kelly and Ms. Bivona to find materials that are grade-appropriate and support students in their native languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required resources and support correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels. In the ELA classes, we have found translated editions of books in Chinese and Spanish. Additionally ENL teachers take articles and short readings that ELA teachers assign and adapt these texts for the use of entering/emerging/transitioning students in the ELA classes. Social studies teachers also have an extensive library of adapted readings and materials from past years in which ENL teachers pushed in to Global History classes. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are aware of the potential for technology to aid in language development and acquisition. Each classroom in the school is furnished with a Smartboard and projector and each teacher is given a laptop and an iPad. The iPads can be given to students for adapted texts, translation, or alternate assignments. The Smartboard Notebook Software, as well as PowerPoint, can be used for visuals, video clips, and manipulation in ways that a standard chalkboard or whiteboard cannot. Additionally, we have seven laptop carts and an iPad cart that can be checked out and used in any class. Last year, we also purchased a number of electronic translators, some of which are state-approved for use during Regents Exams. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We conduct school tours and orientation for new students during the spring semester and during the summer. These tours and orientations are conducted by Kim Ramazan, our parent coordinator, and our teachers and staff. Interpretation is made available to students and parents and all information is translated into various languages. Our goal is that incoming ELLs and their families feel just as welcome as all of our other students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently offer NLA classes, as well as AP Spanish Language and AP Spanish Literature to ensure that students are building on their skills in both languages. 18. For schools with dual language programs: 2  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We provide professional development for teachers and staff throughout the year. Mr. Kelly conducts “courses” with teachers that meet every two weeks for two months at a time. The professional development consists of using ENL data to inform instruction, SIOP strategies, and models strategies put together from a 13 page guide written by Mr. Kelly for the content area teachers. This guide is available for all teachers, but it is used as a text for the workshops conducted by Mr. Kelly. Additionally, Mr. Kelly is available to meet with teachers on a regular basis for planning purposes and staff is continuously provided literature and other resources to build awareness as to the needs of ELLs and best practices to address those needs. As part of the workshops conducted by Mr. Kelly, teachers are invited to bring in their Common Core-based lesson plans. Mr. Kelly models scaffolding strategies for the teachers to help them teach ELLs how to achieve the objectives of the common core. Additionally, all staff is trained in various strategies for discussion, using textual evidence, and other aspects of the Common Core Standards. To better help the ELLs, the entire school has adopted common instructional strategies that are implemented in the same way in every class. These strategies provide a uniform method of annotation, discussion, and writing with textual evidence. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Aside from being invited to student orientations, teachers are invited to work with Mr. Kelly to learn about the social aspects of being an ELL. Mr. Kelly furnishes the teachers with the Years of Service Report (RYOS) and works with teachers to address the needs of specific students. The minimum hours of ELL training for all staff happens thoughout the year. Teachers are given the opportunity to select workshops that meet much more than the minimum requirement for hours of training. This is done through smaller workshops, as well as whole-staff meetings. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents/Guardians of English Language Learners need to be provided assistance and services in their home language. Recognizing this need, Queens Metropolitan High School will hold workshops specifically to our families, whose home languages are Spanish, Chinese and Russian; which are the three largest home language groups. Workshops will assist parents/guardians in motivating and assisting their children to meet high school requirements and to insure college preparedness. Each term, Fall and Spring, Guidance Counselors will hold a workshop/meeting for each language group, Spanish, Chinese and 3  Russian. The topics of the workshop/meeting will include How to Understand Graduation Requirement and High School Records; How to Access Student and School Information; and How to Communicate with Your Child and the School to Improve Academic Achievement. Each term, the College Counselors will hold a meeting/workshop for parents/guardians of ELLs. The topics will include How to Begin the College Application Process. At all workshops/meetings, the workshops will either be conducted in the parents/guardians home language or translation will be provided. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school has an active community. Flyers in home languages will be distributed in classes and mailed home and emailed to parents in various languages. The phone system will be used in the home languages. Information will be posted on the school’s website. Guidance Counselors and College Counselors will outreach to parents/guardians in their caseload. Additionally, Mr. Kelly surveys parents in the fall semester to see what their wants and needs are in regards to academics and social issues. Based on that information, workshops are organized for ELL parents. These workshops coincide with the PTA meetings in the spring semester, so that the parents of ELLs can have the opportunity to go to the PTA meetings afterwards. Additionally, we hold an ENL Family Dinner each spring. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Saida Rodriguez-Tabone, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Queens Metropolitan HS School DBN: 28Q686 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Saida Rodriguez-Tabone Principal Tori Raysor Assistant Principal Kim Ramazan Parent Coordinator Chris Kelly ENL/Bilingual Teacher NA NA NA NA NA Lori Kalman Juan Mendez NA NA NA NA Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 6 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Queens Metropolitan High School Superintendent: Juan Mendez DBN: 28Q686 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No MARIE BIVONA TEACHER YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home language survey and emergency blue cards are used to assess our school's written translation and oral interpretations needs. Parents of new students and entering 9th graders are interviewed in their native language or through translation. This information is entered on the BIOS screen at admission and communication is done in the preferred language. We have students who speak Spanish, Chinese(Mandarin and Cantonese), Japanese, Albanian, Romanian, Polish, Russian, Bengali, Italian, Punjabi, and Hindi. Though many of our parents have indicated that they have no preference as to which language communication is done in, we still have materials and translation available in various languages via school staff or the translation services unit or hotline. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 7  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 100 100 100 Spanish, Albanian, Arabic, Korean, Polish, Greek, Mandarin, Cantonese, Italian, Bengali, Russian, Serbo-Croatian, Japanese, Swahili, Hindi, Portugese, Indonesian, Nepali, Armenian, Punjabi, Belo-Russian Spanish, Albanian, Arabic, Korean, Polish, Greek, Mandarin, Cantonese, Italian, Bengali, Russian, Serbo-Croatian, Japanese, Swahili, Hindi, Portugese, Indonesian, Nepali, Armenian, Punjabi, Belo-Russian NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. na Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. SEPTEMBER 2017 WORKING ON IT NA NA NA NA NA NA Student Handbooks, Discipline Code, Parent-teacher conference announcements, PM School notifications, Summer School notifications, Tutoring schedules, School Calendar, Testing Calendars, Information regarding school events NA NA NA 8  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent-teacher Conferences (twice per semester), Tours for Parents of 8 th Grade Students (ongoing), PTA Meetings(once per month), ENL Parent Workshops (to be decided, depending on survey results), ENL Family Dinner (to be decided - sometime in April), na NA NA SEPTEMBER 2017 HIRE TRANSLATORS provide interpretation service(s)? NOVEMBER 2017 MARCH 2018 MAY 2018 NA NA NA NA NA NA 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. WILL CONTRACT WITH SKEDULA TO START SENDING INFO IN VARIOUS LANGUAGES TO THE HOMES Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. IT WAS DISCUSSED DURING THE SEPTEMBER MEETING Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Information regarding parents' translation and interpretation needs is maintained in ATS, ARIS, on student blue emergency cards, and in the students' files. All staff are required to have translation for parent interactions if they do not speak the parents' language. This is done in-house or via the translation hotline. Documents and letters are also translated to be mailed or sent home with students. Also, materials at meetings and at parent-teacher night is made 9  available in various languages. The tools from the checklist above are also posted and/or available for use on an ongoing basis. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent survey 0 
