 31R008 School Name: P.S. 8 SHIRLEE SOLOMON Principal: LISA ESPOSITO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Public School 8 353100010008 Pre-K thru5 School Number (DBN): 31R008 100 Lindenwood Road, Staten Island, New York 10308 718-356-2800 Phone Number: 718-356-2065 Fax: Lisa Esposito Lesposi2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Lisa Esposito James Laieta Tina Angilletta Michael Ammirato N/A N/a N/A N/a District Information Geographical District: 31 Superintendent’s Office Address: Vincenza Gallassio Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island, New York 10301 VGallas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5657 Phone Number: 718-420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Staten Island FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Kevin Moran Executive Director: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island 10301 Kmoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-556-8367 Phone Number: 718420-5677 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lisa Esposito James Laieta Tina Angilletta Lana Oren Elizabeth Loveridge Dawn Romanello *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent   Name Jennifer Mazzoni Michael Ammirato JoAnn Hotaling Karen Bloom Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent SLT Chairperson/Assistant Principal Member/ Assistant Principal Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our motto at P.S. 8 is: "Children First - High Expectations - No Excuses.: We are a college and career readiness school keeping up with the rigorous standards curriculum, P.S. 8 has integrated the areas of reading, math, writing, science social studies, technology and the arts into our daily curriculum to provide life-long learners. We believe that each child's unique needs and talents must be nurtured in order to develop a passion for learning. We provide our students with a wide range of learning experiences in technology and the arts to create, explore, discover and express unique ideas. Our infusion of our Arts Instruction nourishes our students' minds and bodies as   they use creative expression in visual art to story-tell, act, dance, sing and appreciate the love of music from all periods of time. This is most evident during our assembly and Fitness Gram Programs. At P.S. 8, we adopted Bloomberg's Core Collaborative Framework for empowered learners a District 31 initiative. Our students use technology to bridge the gap between the classroom and the world around us. Our students are challenged by teachers with the use of Promethean Boards, lap-tops, and software programs that enhance learning. Our students achieve state standards using rigorous tasks for independent practice and cooperative learning. Our diverse reading program, Ready Gen includes comprehensive literacy instruction, authentic literature, and skill strategy development. Mathematics is supported with our Go Math Instructional Program. Both our reading and mathematics programs allows us to maintain high performing status in District 31 on the New York State Exams. Our goal is to ensure that all students develop "21st" century minds." Our instructional focus nurtures multiple intelligences, and allows us to meet the needs of every student through small group and tailored learning using data driven approaches. We collaborate to cultivate critical thinking skills through teacher common planning, the use of Socratic Seminars, and a rigorous interdisciplinary curriculum. We are all responsible and accountable for every child's academic, social and emotional development. Our students develop the confidence to achieve academic excellence. This is most evident in our Fourth and Fifth Grade Departmentalized Program where each teacher is a "master" at teaching their specialized subject area (ELA/Math), (Science/Social Studies). Our After-School Programs (offered Monday through Fridays) offer a love of reading and math, higher level thinking skills, athletics, cooking, dance, art, music, band, chorus, and ensures a respect for cultural awareness, diversity, and the belief that each child is unique, special and successful. It is important to remember that adding "fun" and excitement to learning creates the best educational experiences possible. P.S. 8 has made great progress in the art of questioning via Socratic Seminars through challenging tasks and peer to peer discussion. At P.S. 8: "The high expectations for our students aligns with the high expectations we have for ourselves as a community of professional learners." 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 8 is a non-title 1 school. We offer opportunities/programs to all students in Grades K-5 with minimal funding and or outside resources. Although a significant percentage of our students are economically disadvantaged, our school does not qualify for Title 1 funding. P.S. 8 uses the Ready Gen curriculum. This program is used in all grades and lays the groundwork for literacy. Our belief is that all children are readers and writers, and they learn best when they are immersed in a rich literacy environment. Go Math is used in all grades and lays the groundwork for mathematical literacy. The Go Math program provides time for whole group instruction, partner work and individual differentiated activities. Students are encouraged to explain and discuss their mathematical thinking. Classroom science instruction is taught through Next Generation Science Standards hands-on program aligned with STEM activities program and includes science lab periods built into student programming. Social Studies instruction is 0  taught using an integrated approach aligned with the NYS standards through the "Passport to Social Studies" K-5 curriculum. Art/Music, Library and writing enrichment are infused into student programs as well. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Based on our data: NYSESLAT, IEP Goals, TCRWP, Scantron and End of Year Peformance Tasks in both English Language Arts and Mathematics our special student populations are:  English as a New Language - Literacy Intervention, Language acquisition, Reading Volunteers, ENL Teacher  push in/pull out. Individual Education Plans - Orton Gillingham, SETSS, Service Providers, Counseling, Peer Mediation, Conflict Resolution ICT program - SETSS, Service Providers, RTI Self-contained 12:1:1 - Service Providers, Paraprofessionals  ASD program 8:1:1 - Horizon, Service Providers, ASD Coaches, Paraprofessionals    Gifted & Talented - Arts Enrichment, Music Enrichment  Students' needs include congnitive delays, autism spectrum disorders, physical disabilities, speech, language, auditory impairment, emotional disturbance and other learning disabilities. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Accomplishments:  According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, 100% of teachers would recommend this school to families and as a place to work. Our 2016-2017 Quality Review indicates we have received a Well Developed in School Culture.  P.S. 8 received a School Wellness renewal grant in school year 2017/2018 in recognition of maintaining Move -to-Improve "All Star" status from 2016/2017. As outlined in the P.S. 8 School Wellness Action Plan, several after-school enrichment programs (Fitnessgram "Team Fitness" Club, Culinary Institute, and STEM Gardening Club) are offered to all students to promote fitness, health, and wellness at "no cost" to parents. For the past 2 years our students have made consistent gains in ELA & Math as reflected in New York State ELA & Math Scores.   Our 2018 Spring ELA test scores indicate 77% proficiency..  Our 2018 Spring Math scores indicate 79% proficiency. Challenges:  To provide targeted professional learning to our faculty that correlates to measurable evidence of growth in developing critical thinking and writing skills among our student population.  Opportunities for parents to visit the school to share in the success of our students on a more frequent basis.  Improve parent attendance for academic/school workshops, parent teacher conferences, school concerts, and PTA meetings. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R008 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 601 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 27 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 31 29 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 35.0% % Attendance Rate 30.0% % Reduced Lunch 2.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 15.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 73.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 17.6 0% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 76.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 96% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 36 62 94.0% 4.5% 19.0% 1.3% 9.2% 1.2% 2 3% 8.8 78.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 77% of students achieved state standards on the English Language Arts Test. Strengths:  Utilize weekly Teacher Team meetings to support the development of unit and lesson plans to increase    questions and discussion prompts. Students are provided teaching strategies which scaffold their access to challenging tasks, such include Socratic Seminars, learning intentions, formative assessments, success criteria and close reading strategies. Standards-based instruction in all content areas as supported by Common Core aligned resources such as Ready-Gen and Go Math. As well as additional supplemental materials to support standards mastery. Implementation of instructional strategies such as scaffolding, socratic discussion, formative assessment to isolate student needs to achieve mastery. Needs: Although we have made great gains in this area, these needs still continue to be addressed:     Students need to be engaged in purposeful student activities using self & peer assessment to monitor learning. Instruction must be differentiated, rigorous and motivate students. Self-assessment/peer assessment student checklists will be utilized by students across grades to continue to monitor progress aligned to rubrics. Students need to be engaged in higher order level questions and discussions across all classrooms using Socratic seminars and Core Collaborative strategies (Student led classrooms).  Teachers must continue to provide: Clear Learning Intentions with matching formative assessments, engaging learning experiences, and instructional strategies organized into sequence and units of study. 3  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will incorporate a variety of formative assessments into instruction to track student growth in the content areas to increase 3% of students scoring in levels 3 & 4 on the New York State Spring 2019 English Language Arts Exam. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional learning to directly help teachers make the necessary shifts in classroom practice, including new teacher workshops on current initiatives. This includes professional development workshops on proper use and application of formative assessment creating consistency and continuity across the grades. Encourage the use of Google to track student data and share with staff through GoogleDocs. All staff members Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Facilitators Mondays, Tuesdays & Fridays beginning Sept. 2018 and ending June, 2019 Ensure that learning is grounded in day to day teacher practice designed to enhance content specific instruction, which includes differentiated instruction, as well as Formative Assessments such as Benchmarks and Performance Based Assessments given at the end of each Unit of Study. Incorporating the use of Bloom's Taxonomy, technology and content-rich vocabulary that will be evident in teacher practice and observed in formal and informal observations. To ensure progress monitoring of the feedback provided to students, teachers will continue to meet in teams to review evidence of student learning. All staff members Sept.7, 2018-June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff, and Facilitators Ongoing daily Sept, 2018-June, 2019 Ongoing daily Sept, 2018 -June, 2019 Weekly All Teachers All Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Lead Impact Team 5  Strategies in place to help high need learners include frequent cycles of assessments, small group learning, SIT Team Meetings, RTI Meetings to address the needs of our diverse learning population. Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff & Facilitators Administration, Teachers, SAT & Service Providers Monthly meetings held beginning Oct. 2018 to review student progress ongoing till June 2019 AdminTeachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent newsletters, workshops & conferences will take place in order to support parents' understanding of Common Core standards to help them support their children with complex content. 6  Parents are supported through various opportunities to attend staff facilitated learning sessions that include curriculum, state testing and resources to support their children at home such as Engage NY, the Common Core Library, technology mental health awareness and class Twitter page. Target Groups - Parents/Guardians TImeline: Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Key Personnel - Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff & facilitators. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, Assistant Principal, and Staff Facilitators, to support this work in the classroom. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 approximately 70% of teachers through the use of a variety of ongoing formative assessments will result in an at least a 2% increase in student growth and performance in mid-year assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Middle of year assessments, such as performance based assessments embedded in Ready Gen Curriculum K-grade 5. In addition, administered in January - February 2019, Scantron Performance Series, and curriculum grades 2- 5.  Ongoing cycles of formal & informal teacher observations conducted by administration, reflected in Danielson Framework component 3d - assessment, ongoing September 28, 2018 - June 1, 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the NYC School Survey 2017-2018, in supportive environment 92% of teachers surveyed feel that students are responding to challenging questions in class. Strengths:  Weekly, Monday and Friday Professional learning opportunities to strengthen best practices in Danielson component 3b - Questioning and 3d- Assessment.  Weekly common planning for teachers to collaborate.  Teacher mentoring plans to support teacher efficacy  Professional book studies  Monthly RTI meetings to encourage struggling learners Needs: Although our NYC School Survey 2017-2018 revealed parent and teacher satisfaction, the following areas still continue to be addressed:  Specific, differentiated professional learning to enhance and expand teacher practice based on the MoTP component 3b... using questioning and discussion techniques according to the Danielson Framework for teaching.  Using question strategies with students classified as students with disabilities and English as new Learners.  Higher order thinking (DOK) questions to promote discussion and stimulate deep analysis of texts.  Questions to facilitate in self and peer assessment.  Scaffolding questions to better support students who struggle. Part 2 – Annual Goal 8  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019 the school will receive an overall score of at least 97% or higher on the Supportive School Environment component(students' appropriate behavior in class) of the NYC School Survey 2018-2019 as measured through the results of the School Survey. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent Talk Time meetings and scheduled individualized parent meetings to foster partnerships between teachers and parents and communicate best practices and monitor student growth. Workshop and parent topics may include understanding Common Core shifts in ELA, Math, and NYS testing, Children's Mental Health and cyber bullying. Offerings may be scheduled in the evenings in collaboration with PTA to accommodate working parents. Instructional support will be provided for students with disabilities, ENL's and other high need students using differentiated intervention accommodations, multiple entry points and daily AIS small group instruction. Additional support is also provided to parents of ENL students through the Parent Coordinator, ENL teacher and Field Support Center staff and oral interpreters when needed. Provide written and verbal information (in native language to best extent possible) to parents regarding instructional shifts and trends in student performance. School will distribute SLT Newsletter Connections, parent notices and Parent Handbook to all parents in order to inform them of important academic and behavioral expectations. . Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All parents Monthly during Parent Engagement Oct. 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Administration, SLT members, PTA, Teachers All parents, ENL's, SWDs, high need students Oct. 2018-June 2019 during Parent Engagement SAT Team, Parent Coordinator, SETSS teacher, ENL teacher, Parent members, Administration All parents Parents Monthly Oct. 2018 - Ongoing to June 2019 Monthly Oct. 2018- Ongoing to June 2019 Administration, Teachers, PTA, SLT Members Principal, Parent Coordinator, PTA, SLT Members Parents Monthly Sept. 2018 - Ongoing to June 2019 0 P.S. 8 website provides information on all grade level instruction, resources and upcoming events/workshops to support student learning. Website has translation feature to accommodate non English speaking parents. Distribution of PTA Newsletter, "The Dolphin Newsletter", on a monthly basis, funded by the PTA Monthly Oct. 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Parents. WebMaster PTA Implementation of Therapeutic Crisis Intervention, Restorative Justice Strategies, Positive Behavior Incentives Parents Students All school staff Ongoing 9/2018- 6/2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parent Coordinator is available anytime. Weekly Wednesday Mornings - Parent Talk Time, Parents are invited to attend workshops to support students' needs.   Providing workshops between mornings and evenings relevant to resources to help strengthen home school connection (P.S. 8 website, Engage NY, Common Core Library).   Ongoing communication with families regarding student performance through phone calls, e-mails and meetings.   Providing Orton-Gillingham training for special education teachers to move students with academics or language needs.   Weekly Friday Focus Groups in addition to regularly scheduled Monday Professional Development to support students' needs and support all teachers across all subject areas. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, Teachers, and Guidance Counselor will support this work in the classrooms. Student learning goals for accountability, and Monday’s Professional Learning Time for teachers to evaluate and set goals to establish coherence and consistency across grades. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 1  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, attendance and participation will be monitored weekly and will demonstrate an increase in parent engagement by 2%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. This will be measured through attendance sheets at workshops. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey 94% of teachers surveyed agreed that their professional development opportunities included working collaboratively with teachers from other schools. Strengths:  Teacher Impact teams meet weekly to implement PD on Core Collaborative, Success Criteria, Learning Intentions and Formative Assessments, as well as shared experiences from working with other teachers across the district.  Teachers collaborate to design instructional programs, analyze student work during regular cycles of inquiry and develop rigorous lessons.  Weekly common preparation periods to share best practices and analyze student work and identify next steps.  Teachers who attend external PD turnkey pertinent information that is sustained and coherently focused and can be successfully implemented into their classrooms.  All teachers are invited to attend Friday Morning Focus Study Group meetings, where they inter-visit a colleague to improve teacher practice.  Teachers may follow a suggested inter-visitation schedule Needs:      Increase the partnership among schools with similar programs, so as to afford teachers the opportunity to collaborate. Increase the number of faculty members who join online professional communities as suggested by District 31 such as Google communities using the school's Google Drive Platform. Implement staff surveys throughout the year through PD/PL committee to gage needs of the staff and identify appropriate faculty members to facilitate professional learning with the purpose of meeting specific needs for students and professional growth. Increase the number of teachers who facilitate regularly scheduled weekly professional development. Implement a new Book Study to improve teacher practice that aligns to the Core Collaborative District 31 initiative. Part 2 – Annual Goal 3  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of teachers will engage in professional learning sessions offered by the Field Support Center and other Department of Education facilitators. Teachers will implement best practices observed during school-based inter-visitations resulting in an increase in teacher practice & instructional strategies as measured by the "Framework for Teaching", component 4E. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Use professional learning to directly help teachers align their instructional strategies to the CCLS. Professional development includes strategies for engaging and supporting all students in learning to meet their needs through data driven instruction. This includes self and peer assessment, increased student use of technology, and increased student-led discussion. Teachers will also meet in horizontally aligned professional communities to discuss trends throughout all grade levels. Special Education teachers and ENL teacher will provide support in scaffolding techniques which further support the diversity of all learners to be cognitively engaged. These strategies include the use of modalities of learning, modeling and goal setting. All Classroom Teachers Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers Beginning Teachers, Staff, Administration Lead Impact Team Sept. 5, 2018 during weekly professional learning sessions that focus on support teachers to implement stronger formative strategies in order to tract student data. Ongoing June 2019 Beginning Sept. 5, 2018 weekly Monday and Friday morning learning sessions that provide teachers with strategies to build student efficacy, surrounding student performance. Provide opportunities for teachers to engage in professional learning that are school based as well as the Staten Island Field Support Center. Teachers that attend professional learning at the Staten Island Field Support Center will "turn-key" P.D. to All Teachers Ongoing June 2019 Administration and Teachers 5 school faculty. The PD/PL committee will meet regularly to schedule P.D. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Key members of staff administration, Parent Coordinator and community members will present topics for discussion or provide meetings with parents on Wednesday morning during Parent Engagement time beginning October 2018 and ending in June 2019. Engage parents as active involved participants emphasizing a culture of learning that communicates high expectations connected to a path of college and career readiness, expressed through newsletters, school correspondence and meetings with parents at the school. Teacher facilitated on-going workshops for parents on how to support their children with the CCLS and rigorous instruction taking place in the classroom. Community members/CBOs to discuss relevant topics such as child health and welfare. This includes representatives from the Department of Health and Staten Island Health and Mental Hygiene. Creating an open door policy for communication and support for parents and care givers. This will include using inventory surveys to identify specific needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, Special Education and ENL Teacher will work collaboratively to meet the needs of students evidenced by professional learning, collaboration and open communication between home and school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 6  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 50% of teachers will facilitate a professional learning session for faculty, which may include hosting an inter-visitation. This will be measured by "Framework for Teaching" component 4E: Growing and Developing Professionally. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PD/PL Plan, Teacher logs , agendas, mentoring logs of assistance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of the observation data from the Advance website, school year 2017/2018 showed that all teachers were observed in a timely manner, including beginning of the year and end of the year teacher professional conferences. Teachers also received actionable feedback in a timely manner to assist in their individual growth and teacher practice in areas where teacher practice needs specific support. Strengths: ● Observations completed in a timely manner in accordance with Advance calendar. ● Actionable feedback to teachers given in a timely manner, to improve teacher practice and pedagogy in accordance with the Danielson Framework Rubric. Needs:  Provide specific feedback and next steps in an area of focus, for teachers to use for their own professional growth and to improve instruction across the content areas based on formal & informal observations from administration. Increased effectiveness in use of school wide formative assessments (3d) as well as strengthening of Socratic Discussion (3b). as indicated by the Quality Review feedback May 2019.   Track teacher's growth in Advance web application on a regular basis, as cycles of observations progress.  Teachers will be required to include scaffolding extensions and multiple entry points to support high need student populations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 8  By June 2019, at least 70% or higher of teachers will show increased effectiveness in components 3b and 3d respectively, as evidenced by ratings of Effective in observations conducted by Administration. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monitor scheduling to complete all observations and feedback within a timely manner. All Teachers Plan professional learning designed to specifically address strategies to improve classroom pedagogy and teacher practice, especially relative to student engagement (3c) and assessment (3d). Including strategies that address use of multiple entry points and use of technology to support instruction, as well as strategies to support social and emotional learning (TCIS and Respect for All). Provide ongoing, targeted professional development to support teachers in designing coherent instruction that reaches the needs of all students especially ESL, SWD's and other high need student subgroups. Provide relevant workshops with current topics during Parent Talk Time to inform parents of suggestions for supporting their children at home and meeting the demands of the CCLS, including easing anxiety, time management, shifts in Common Core, and best practices in the content areas. All ClassroomTeachers, SETSS Teacher, Service Providers All Parents Ongoing weekly beginning Sept., 2018 and ending June, 2019 Ongoing weekly beginning Sept., 2018-through June, 2019 Monthly during parent engagement beginning Oct. 2018 Weekly Sept, 2018 ongoing till June, 2019 Administration Administration, Lead Instructional Team Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator 0 Tracking teacher effectiveness in components 3b & 3d in the Advance web application MoTP teacher tracking feature which provides percentages of teachers who have increased in effectiveness in these areas. Teachers Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 8 Website, provides key information regarding school announcements. Each teacher also maintains a class page where homework and class news and announcements are posted. Remind App 101 - provides immediate feedback to parents regarding school issues. Before & After-School programs at no cost to families. NYC School Account, contains relevant data to individual students such as up to date attendance and standardized test scores. Parent Coordinator engages parents in leadership roles and becoming actively involved in the P.S. 8 community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, professional learning time with resources such as Close Reading, goal setting, and College and Career Readiness. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of teachers who have completed two or more Advance observations by Administration, will demonstrate effectiveness in components 3b & 3d respectively. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The school's midpoint benchmark toward meeting the goal will be confirmed by February 2019, through the completion of evaluations by administration, through the Advance system. Teacher effectiveness will be tracked based on the Advance web application, MoTP teacher tracker feature including pie graph which outlines the percentage of teachers who have received developing or effective respectively. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the NYC School Survey (2017-2018) it is determined that we need to improve our communication to parents. This survey revealed that 87% of parents felt they have been given an opportunity to volunteer time to support the school. Strengths:  Various events to showcase student performances, which include instructional fairs, sports and fitness and performing arts.  Class mothers as liaisons are assigned to each class.  Active Executive Board members who implement a plethora of activities for the school community (Book Fair, fundraisers, school events). Needs: According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, 13% of parents have rarely been asked to support our school. Therefore, these needs must still be addressed:  A functional school website in order to inform a larger number of parent and school community members. Increase use of technology, such as the Remind App 101, to keep parents informed about school business.   Teachers will utilize technology with parents to gain support and increase communication and involvement in the planning and decision-making of their children.  Open communication and access to the Parent Coordinator.  PTA e-blasts SLT Newsletter   PTA Newsletter  Electronic message board outside of the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2  By June 2019, 100% of parents are given the opportunity through the school to access technology that is used to disseminate school information and be provided information with student progress and performance. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Learning to address the strategies to assist teachers in planning a culture of instructional rigor to prepare students for college and career readiness. Administration, All Teachers Sept. 2018/ June 2019 Provide class and grade level workshops for parents to become more familiar their child's grade level learning standards in order to provide assistance at home, through the use of school website, the NYC account and Remind App 101. All teachers and parents Ongoing Oct. 2018 through June 2019 Administration, Staff developers, Teachers Administration, Teachers and Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator and Webmaster will be tracking use of NYC School account and views and visits to our website. All teachers and parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator and Web Master Provide families of special learners in ENL students with links to assist them in maximizing their students learning. In addition, the website is able to be translated to accommodate diverse languages oral translators available as needed. Parent Talk Time (Wednesdays) Ongoing Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Support Services, SAT, Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. After-school & Early Morning school enrichment programs. FDNY Fire Safety UAU - Children's Activities after Three program 3:20 - 6:00 P.M. Too Good for Drugs initiative through NYPD NYPD Specialized Units Fitnessgram New York Public LIbrary Staten Island Mental Health Reading Volunteers District 31 Community Education Council 4  Local dentists, doctors and military families to educate students. Frequent communication with parents regarding educational goals, expectations, and opportunities for support from families provided through the Remind 101 APP and P.S. 8's website, Dolphins8.org and NYC School account. Target Group: All Parents Timeline: Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Key Personnel: All Teachers, Parent Coordinator, PTA & SLT Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Learning, P.S. 8 Website, Remind App 101. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as evidenced by website, site statistics information we will be able to track the total number of visits and views to our newly designed school website, as available to Web Master on Dolphins8.org, via school wires. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Website site statistics tracking system, Dolphin8.org. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Evidence of student growth reflected by ItemSkills Analysis on NYC ELA PerformanceTasks, ELA Units of Study, Summative and Formative Assessments. Evidence of student growth reflected by student performanceon NYCMath Performance Tasks determined by the Item Skills Analysis,Math Performance Tasks determined by the Item Skills Analysis, Summative & Formative Assessments NGSS Science Program, Classroom Assessments, Teacher Observations Also embedded in ReadyGen, non-Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Classroom, small group, one to one individual conferencing. During the school day Classroom, smallgroup, one to one, individual conferencing During the school day Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Core Collaborative Close read, organizers, annotating, shorter passages, guided reading Formative assessment strategies implemented to inform future instruction. Differentiated problems. solving strategies, manipulatives, varied response types, graph paper, technology support to enhance learning. Close Read, hands on visual representations, Classroom, small group, one to one, individual conferencing During the school day Core Collaborative 6  Social Studies fiction Texts and ReadyGenUnits of Study. Social Studies instruction is taught using an integrated approach aligned with the NYS standards through the "Passport to Social Studies" K-5 curriculum. Close Read, visual representations Classroom, small group, one to one conferencing Core Collaborative During the school day At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Interventions for struggling students as identified by School Based Support Team members and classroom teachers Guidance Interventions, Peer Mediation, Parent Conferences, Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Services Counseling sessions conducted in a group or 1:1 setting Daily 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) None 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). None 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 0 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 0  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 1  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 8, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 3  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 4  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 8, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 5  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 6  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 7  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 8  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name The Shirlee Solomon School Borough Staten Island School Number 008 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lisa Esposito Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Galyna Shaller, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Ellen Petimar Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal JoAnn Hotaling Coach N/A School Counselor Arlene Orlando Parent Parent Coordinator AnnaMarie Cardillo Field Support Center Staff Member Mr. Enrico Domingo Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 604 0 Total number of ELLs 30 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.97%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Currciulum embedded assessments are utilized across all classrooms to assess the literacy skills of all students including ELLs. P.S. 8 uses TCRWP in Grades K-5 to assess student independent reading levels regularly throughout the year. The TCRWP assessments Include running records, concepts of print, conference notes, letter identification and sound recognition. Based on the results of our assessments, the ENL Teacher along with the classroom teachers will use the data to create smart goals and action plans to further develop ELLs reading skills. Language objectives are linked to CCLS based on lessons in ELA and Math. Furthermore, this data helps inform our school’s instructional plan by determining if the students are on grade level or if they need response to intervention (RTI) to reach grade level. If a student is below grade level they will participate in small groups with skill based lessons until they master the skills needed to reach grade level. A combination of formative assessments (conference notes, exit slips after small group lessons, quick checks for understanding and assessments embedded throughout the Ready Gen and GoMath curriculum, such as Performing Based Tasks, support teachers in making data-driven decisions. 1  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Regularly administered TCRWP assessments for each marking period provide an accurate view of student progress in reading comprehension and fluency. P.S. 8 uses TCRWP to assess early literacy skills of our ELLs. This data provides insight into ELLs reading, speaking, listening and writing levels. This data helps inform our school’s instructional plan by determining if the students are on grade level or if they need response to intervention (RTI) to reach grade level. Students below grade level are placed in small groups with skill based lessons until they master the skills needed to reach grade level. Teachers use a Formative Assessment Planning sheet to monitor and track learning progressions. Every child in grades Kindergarten through 5th has a Student Portfolio that tracks their learning progression in Reading, Writing, and Math. Furthermore, the ELL teacher keeps an additional student portfolio for ELL students. P.S. 8 implements core literacy instruction that promotes oral language acquisition. This helps all students, especially ELLs, to build academic language and vocabulary. All classrooms are print-rich and include child-friendly labels, charts, bulletin boards, word walls, and rubrics to guide students in assessing their learning. Every classroom has a leveled library that students can use. Teachers co-create with students a learning environment that offers multiple entry points into the lesson, including opportunities for discussion and interaction. Examples include: Socratic discussions, differentiated instruction, visual support, use of technology, read-alouds, think-alouds, self and peer assessments, Total Physical Response (TPR), and use of manipulatives, activation of prior knowledge and front-loading vocabulary, questions stems, discussion starters, and bilingual glossaries. Teachers trained in the Orton-Gillingham Instructional Approach facilitate professional development for staff. This allows teachers to plan lessons that support ELL students with reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills. P.S. 8 also offers all students early morning and after-school enrichment programs in ELA, math, performing arts, health and fitness, and culinary to support student learning and language acquisition. These enrichment programs are at no cost to the school community. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? P.S. 8 uses NYC Performance Tasks in ELA and Math in Grades K through 5th for initial baseline/benchmark assessments. Teachers align assessments to key standards and curricula to provide actionable feedback to students. Teacher Impact teams regularly administer assessments throughout units of study and use student data to adjust curriculum and make accommodations. Teachers integrate checks for understanding and student self-and peer assessment into instruction to determine next steps for student growth. Teachers also use SCANTRON Performance Series to monitor and track student learning in Reading, Language, and Math. The instructional program is aligned to the ReadyGen curriculum for reading and writing, and the GoMath curriculum for math. Performance-based tasks at the end of every unit of study in ReadyGen and GoMath are administered to students so teachers can analyze strengths and areas of improvement. The GoMath curriculum includes Beginning-of-Year (BOY), Middle-of-Year (MOY), and End-of-Year (EOY) assessments to track student growth throughout the year and plan for small-group instruction to support students that are not meeting performance targets. Both curriculums offer additional support, modifications, and accommodations specifically for ELLs and students with disabilities. Teachers differentiate their instruction based on these additional curriculum supports and on the student data they track daily. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? P.S. 8 uses summative data to inform instruction, determine student performance level, strengths, weaknesses and next steps. Effective feedback provides student learning goals and determines what they need to learn next. Teachers will continue to monitor and track student progress and adjust curriculum to the student's specific needs. P.S. 8 implements an Academic Intervention Service (AIS) block daily on each grade, Kindergarten through 5th, which allows teachers to deliver focused small-group instruction around specific skills that students need based on tracking data from assessments. This is especially crucial for ELLs who need additional support to meet rigorous standards in ELA and Math. Teachers monitor and track student data using TCRWP running records, as well as Google Docs and Google Drive. They meet in regularly scheduled cycles of Inquiry to collaborate on planning lessons to address student needs they identify from the data. Teacher Impact Teams analyze student data horizontally and vertically across grades to differentiate lessons and share best practices in collaboration with the ELL teacher. 2  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S.8 holds monthly Teacher Impact Team meetings for all students that are receiving Response to Intervention (RTI) for grades K-5. Teachers monitors and track student progress and discuss strategies with staff members. Currently, the school uses the RTI contained in ReadyGen and GoMath curriculums in grades K-5. ReadyGen and GoMath have RTI identification components built into their assessments. These assessments guide instruction for small group intervention based on student needs. Flexible grouping is based on students individual academic and learning needs. RtI always follows evidence-based strategies aimed at supporting ELL students’ diverse needs, offering intense support but then gradually removing it as students show progress. Extra support from the ELL teacher can take place in the classroom but also in separate settings with instruction focused on specific learning targets for each child. P.S. 8 uses progress monitoring and tracking through formal and informal assessments to identify ELL needs and develop instructionally appropriate and evidence-based interventions that foster academic success. As per the ELL Policy guide, former ELLs can receive at least one half of one unit of study in English as a new language (90 minutes per week). They are also eligible to receive certain specified testing accommodations. ELL students that have passed the NYSESLAT are closely monitored for two years for difficulties they may continue to experience in instruction and language acquisition. Flexible grouping is based on students individual academic and learning needs. The RTI model also contains a strong parent engagement component to support ELLs. P.S. 8 utilizes weekly scheduled Parent Talk Time to offer workshops to inform parents of ELLs of important information throughout the school year. The ELL teacher translates school notices, student score reports, and report cards through STARS Reporting with DOE assistance. Oral translators are contacted on behalf of parents that can communicate in ELL students’ native languages and English for parent meetings and IEP conferences. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns from the 2017 NYSESLAT reveal that out of the 30 ELL students, 9 of the students scored commanding, 11 students scored next level above, 5 students performed on the same level and 5 students were new and were tested on NYSITELL. NYSITELL data helps teachers plan programs that best fit ELL needs by allowing them to group like students for tailored learning activities, pair students at different proficiency levels in class, and determine ENL instructional time. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Formative and summative assessments to monitor and track learning progressions in all content areas. This allows students to set learning goals, and empowers teachers to differentiate activities, provide specific, actionable feedback, and build strong, multi-tiered instructional models that are culturally and linguistically responsive in every classroom. Progress monitoring through Google Drive allows Teacher Impact Teams to share, analyze, and use student data to make informed, strategic decisions. Weekly, structured professional development opportunities and grade team meetings during common planning periods provide teachers to enhance their pedagogy and collaborate with the ENL teacher on delivering appropriate lessons for ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL instruction is provided as a combination of integrated and standalone services based on student proficiency levels (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding) following CR-154.2 requirments. Integrated 3  ENL services includes the ENL teacher working in collaboration with the classroom teacher using ENL methodologies. In the standalone model, the ENL teacher focuses on specific skills based on student needs. ENL services are provided by certified English as a New Language teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? P.S. 8 has an English as a New Language (ENL) program. All staff, including administration, classroom teachers, and service providers are aware of students NYSESLAT and NYSITELL proficiency levels. All ENL students that are at commanding level receive 90 minutes of push-in ENL service per week for two years. Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated instruction per week. Transitioning students receive 180 minutes of integrated or stand alone service depending on their needs. Emerging students receive 360 minutes per week, 90 minutes of stand alone service, 180 minutes of integrated and 90 flexible minutes. Entering ELLs receive 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction, 180 minutes as integrated and 180 minutes as stand alone. Administrators have a copy of the ENL teacher's schedule ensuring that students are being serviced properly as per Chancellors Regulations Part 154.2. As per the ELL Policy and Reference Guide, all ELLs are required to receive a minimum number of units of ENL instruction, which is programmed and tracked individually through STARS reporting. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our Freestanding ENL program, content is delivered in English using ENL methodologies with native language support. ELLs are given bilingual glossaries to support their understanding in core content areas. Social studies and science are incorporated into literacy, mathematics, technology, and art. Teachers collaborate across content areas and grades to develop a cohesive learning environment for students and increase their depth of knowledge. The ENL teacher scaffolds content through the use of visual aids, pre-teaching vocabulary, manipulatives, and additional materials to meet the specific language needs of every ELL student. Teachers use explicit modeling in the core instruction program and provide students with differentiated opportunities for discussion and interaction. These opportunities extend beyond the classroom to performing arts, dance, exercise, sports, assemblies, cultural heritage recognition, and food. Classrooms are print-rich, contain leveled libraries, and offer students with child-friendly rubrics, prior knowledge charts, and word wall vocabulary in all content areas. Classrooms also have internet access and are wired for technology, which includes computers, laptops, iPads, and Promethean boards for teacher and student use. Such instructional approaches and supports work together seamlessly to encourage a deep analysis of text through class and peer discussions. Teachers also explicit modeling to guide students in the formal writing process, including drafts, editing, revising, and self- and peer assessment. Graphic organizers are used to build ELL content knowledge and formulate ideas. The use of student native language dictionaries build academic vocabulary and word usage. Teachers use read-alouds, storytelling, and open-ended DOK level questioning to activate prior knowledge, enhance discussion, assess student learning, and monitor and track student comprehension. Teachers use manipulatives such as counters, cubes, measuring tools, fraction strips, and hands-on activities to engage ELL students in math and science. Furthermore, PS8 has a school library and science room complete with individual iMac laptops for student use. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 4  ELL's are given bilingual glossaries to support their understanding in core content areas. ELL's are evaluated using the spanish Lab-R if they score below the NYSITELL cut score. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiating instruction for ELL subgroups is vital in their learning. a. SIFE students are closely assessed to identify where the gaps in there learning are. SIFE students are taught the CCLS according to their grade and English proficiency. Lessons are modified for them. b. Newcomers that have been in the United States for less than three years are taught the CCLS which is modified to their English proficiency. Oral language, phonics, and vocabulary are strongly enforced for newcomers and reinforced in the classrooms. c. Developing ELLs are assessed often to identify areas of growth and areas to be improved. Lessons aligned to the CCLS build from the information they have not mastered. d. Long-term ELLs need to be monitored closely and may be candidates for mediation such as the Response to intervention (RTI) model. These students can be evaluated to determine if language or a disability is impeding their ability to reach English proficiency. If the student has an IEP, the differentiation is based on the student’s goals. The student should be assessed often and lessons should build from the information they have not mastered and aligned to the CCLS within their IEP goals. Lessons also scaffold to support students and maintain their language strategies for reading, writing, listening, and speaking. The lessons are modified for the student to better understand grade level and complex texts. e. Former ELLs receive ENL test accomodations as well as additional ENL support for two years after passing the NYSESLAT. They are closely monitored by their classroom teacher, the ENL teacher is always available to offer extra support to former ELLs when needed. Former ELLs are often placed in a classroom with current ELLs, so the ENL teacher is easily accessible to them within the integrated model. Examples of additional resources include, phonics, and phonemic awareness and the ReadyGen Scaffold handbook for differentiated ENL-SWD instruction. All licensed Special Education teachers at PS8 attended Orton-Gillingham training through district-level professional development. They facilitate professional development within the school for teaching staff. Teachers work collaboratively with service providers and the ENL teacher to scaffold and differentiate instruction, utilize purposeful, flexible grouping of students, activate and build on students’ prior knowledge of content, and use ongoing Socratic Discussions to increase speaking and listening skills. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? P.S. 8 uses ReadyGen and GoMath curriculum for all students in kindergarten through fifth grade. These programs allow teachers to use multiple entry points for all students including ELLs and SWDs. Teachers also use supplementary materials and additional resources to scaffold the curriculum. All teachers and staff engage in professional development and Professional Learning Communities to improve delivery of instruction to all students. Teachers use a variety of research-based instructional strategies to support ELL-SWD learning. Examples include: flexible grouping, differentiation of activities, multiple-entry points, graphic organizers, child-friendly charts and rubrics, self- and peer assessments, use of manipulatives and technology, and explicit modeling. A strong emphasis is placed on core instruction, especially oral language acquisition. Teachers integrate oral language and vocabulary instruction into writing instruction by having students verbalize their thinking before putting it into writing, and share aloud after they have thought and written about the topic use new vocabulary and language structures in their writing. This is done through the use of small group instruction, where students have opportunities to speak, listen, and respond to higher-order DOK level questions. Teachers use story books, visual aides, and vocabulary to build on students’ background knowledge. Teachers in all grades spend considerable time modeling and engaging students in the writing process, including drafting, revising, editing, producing and sharing final piece, and assessing using rubrics and checklists. ELL-SWD students use tools to support their writing, such as sentence starters, and graphic organizers. ELL-SWD students also learn close read strategies to support deep analysis of text, which improves their fluency and comprehension. Teachers also use writing prompts and journals to improve the quality of writing for ELL-SWD students. 5  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Various instructional materials are used to support ELLs. ELLs are exposed to materials such as visual aids, glossaries, and guided reading texts aligned to their individual reading level. ReadyGen and GoMath have an ELL component built in for ELLs. Furthermore technology is used through Smartboards and Promethean Boards with computer based interactive lessons for literacy, math, science, social studies, art /music. In addition to the use of smart boards, computers and iPads are used by students in every classroom. P.S. 8 is committed to flexible programming to maintain instructional rigor and providing low-risk environments for all students to work toward their goals. The use of the curricular at P.S. 8 for ELLS-SWDs is the same as the NYS mandated curricular for the students' grade level. . 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention program continues to follow an RTI model. GoMath and ReadyGen have tier one, two, and three student intervention books to use with the students that did not master the skill in the lesson. Students are frequently assessed before, during and after lessons and units to monitor and track student progress. ELL students with IEPs attend SETSS for intervention in ELA and Math in a small group to master the skills they need. Student programs are adjusted based on formative and summative assessment data to accommodate their learning needs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? PS 8 has added two new writing cluster programs. Foundations is also in place for grades K-2. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are part of our school community and have equal access to all curriculum, programs, and services that are offered at PS 8. There are a multitude of school programs that are available to students including ELLs. School programs include the P.S. 8 Chorus and Band Club. P.S. 8 offers an after school program sponsored by United Activities Unlimited (UAU) program. In addition, P.S. 8 offers several early-morning and after-school enrichment programs such as, Gardening Club, Reading has Meaning, Culinary Institute, Glee 8 Club, Slam Dunk Basketball, Cheer Works, The Little Picasso, Scrap-Book Memoirs, Rise & Shine Get in Line and All Star Ball. P.S. 8 also offers enrichment and support programs in ELA ("Reading Has Meaning") and Math ("Adding Up to Success"). All of our programs are in place to develop a well-rounded learner and provided multisensory learning. All students are invited to participate at no cost to families. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Various instructional materials are used to support ELLs. ELLs have access to materials such as visual aids, glossaries, leveled classroom libraries. ReadyGen and GoMath ELL scaffolds and supports embedded in the curriculum. Technology is used through Smart boards and Promethean Boards along with computer-based interactive lessons for literacy, math, science and social studies. In addition, computers, laptops, calculators, measuring tools, and audio equipment are used to provide multiple entry points for ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 6  Native language support is delivered in our ENL program by the use of content area glossaries and bilingual dictionaries. In addition, books are provided in the students' native language to support literacy at home. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All staff members collaborate to support the needs of ELLs. Classroom teachers and service providers share materials to reinforce a lessson or concept through multiple points of entry. All teachers of ELLs are aware of their age, grade level, and language proficiency, so they can best assist students in reaching language proficiency and IEP goals. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL students meet with the ENL teacher at registration. An informal interview is conducted as well as assistance in filling out the home language survey. Parent of NYSITELL eligible ELLs will be informed that their child will be tested for ENL services and results will be sent home with their child within the first 10 days of school. At this time the parents are able to ask any questions they may have to the ENL teacher regarding their child. Parents are given as much information as possible in their native language and school memos are translated before sending documents and memos home. Students are carefully placed in classrooms with other students who may be able to assist each other as well. During this time resources are also provided so the students could practice the expectations of the CCLS over the summer. Parent-talk time is offered weekly to all parents with any questions or concerns regarding their child's academic and social progress. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? No language electives are offered at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? P.S. 8 does not have a dual language program; but if we get 15 students with the same language in the same class we will adhere to the mandates and protocols. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher attends the Division of School Support and Instruction professional development meetings provided by the Borough Field Support offices and meetings by the office of English Language Learners when applicable. The ENL teacher and 7  the administration attend professional development meetings and turn-key the information to classroom teachers. The classroom teachers will continue to attend all mandated ENL professional development hours as needed. In addition, 15% of all in-house professional development will be geared toward ENL training for all teachers. Teachers are informed when professional development is available for teachers of ELLs. Our ENL teacher will also assist in developing best practices for teachers of students with ELLs. The ENL teacher turn-keys ELL strategies to the staff to ensure they meet the required 15% of PD on ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Through District 31 scheduled Professional Development workshops, the ENL teacher attends training to turn-key information to classroom teachers. Records are kept by the ENL teacher including agendas, attendance, and copies of handouts. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P.S. 8 will provide each parent with an annual individual meeting to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This will be done during the parent involvement time that has been allotted into Wednesday mornings. During this time translation will be provided to parents based on their requested language. Attendance sheets will be kept on file. If a parent is unable to come in person a telephone conference will be conducted and the meeting will be logged in the parent engagement tracking sheet that is provided by the school. Translation services are made available upon request for as needed for all parent meetings based on the parent’s preferred language. A qualified interpreter translator of the language parent or guardian best understands, is present at each meeting. P.S. 8 will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit if we require an interpreter for any language that is not spoken by the school staff. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P.S. 8 is committed to providing workshops to benefit the needs of all parents. Workshops are provided monthly to parents,including parents of ELLs. Various topics are offered as per parent request. Each year P.S. 8 holds on open house for new parents to view the school. Parents are given tours of classrooms,educated on school programs, and are given a chance to meet the staff. Workshops are offered in both ELA and Math for parents of ELL students in Grades 3,4, and 5. These workshops provide information and suggestions on how to help children meet the demands of the NY State ELA and Mathematics standardized exams. K-2 workshop “Help your Child Grow as A Reader” aligned to the common core standards, including strategies for reading, online access, read-a-louds, hands on activities, and a list of helpful websites. P.S. 8 has a special assembly for bullying for parents of 4th and 5th grade students. A NYPD police officer from community affairs youth service to speak to students regarding the prevention of bullying. It also addresses how to handle a situation if your child is bullying or being bullied. P.S. 8 also has parent conflict/resolution workshops held by the school guidance counselor that teaches parents how to avoid conflict and establish resolution. Representatives from Junior High School inform students about the transition from 5th grade to middle school. P.S. 8's office school website, Dolphins 8.org strengthens home and school connections and assist parents with a homework assignment. The school also offers parents the chance to participate in a parent/student Pre-K Breakfast. This breakfast is used to address key-points regarding Pre-K; parents will learn what is expected of their child in Pre-K, the importance of homework, reading, and routine. P.S. 8 also has a special 5th grade parent assembly. P.S. 8 is always working on new innovative ways to involve parents in our community. Moreover, all parents are invited to grade specific curriculum conferences to introduce curriculum to the parents. The parents are encouraged to discuss and/or write down workshops they would be interested in at PTA meetings. The parent 8  coordinator also contacts parents by phone and letters (translated as needed) to determine workshop needs. P.S. 8 works to put all of the suggestions into action to best meet the parents’ needs. P.S. 8 secures translators as needed. Our parental involvement activities address the needs to our parents to stay informed on school-wide news. The PTA engages parents in coordinating a "Back to School" Fair, a spring carnival, holiday dances, field trips, and fund raisers. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. P.S. 8 provides a vast amount of community driven school activities enabling the students to develop into responsible citizens, exposes them to a variety of content based subjects, encourages their involvement and sparks their ambitions to be diverse life-long learners. Assemblies include, 9/11 memorial assembly; Fitness Gram assemblies to teach students about the importance of staying healthy; Rapping Fireman and the NYC Fire Department teach fire safety; a story teller comes from the New York City Public Library to read-a-loud stories to the students;local dentists come to teach students about oral hygiene; anti-bullying assemblies to teach students the importance of being kind and respectful to one another; 5th grade Spelling Bee assembly to assess students spelling skills and importance of spelling. P.S. 8 with support of the PTA holds school carnivals, Holiday fairs, books fairs, and a Mother’s Day Tea. Moreover, each grade is responsible for a school-wide production or performance. They are an enriching way for students to learn through dance, music, art, language and physical movement. 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lisa Esposito, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The School DBN: 31R0 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Lisa Esposito Title Principal JoAnn Hotaling Assistant Principal AnnaMarie Cardillo Parent Coordinator Galyna Shaller, ENL ENL/Bilingual Teacher Tina Angilletta Parent Ellen Petimar, Related Service Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Arlene Orlando School Counselor Anthony Lodico Mr. Enrico Domingo Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R008 School Name: The Shirlee Solomon School Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Cardillo Parent Coordinator yes AnnMarie N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A N/A N/A * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At registration, the ENL Teacher, assesses the home language of a student and issues the OTELE code on the HLIS form. This data is then entered into ATS by the secretary. Our secretary downloads the RHLA and the RPOB reports from ATS to identify the written translation and oral interpretation needs of our parents. This report is given to our ENL teacher as well as our Parent Coordinator. This report is used for the distribution of any materials, flyers and information to our parents. An informal survey is conducted by our Parent Coordinator with the classroom teacher to collect any information on student languages and home language needs. The information is updated as needed periodically throughout the school year. 2  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Chinese Italian 0 6 15 2 0 0.98 2.44 0.33 0 6 13 2 0 0.98 2.11 0.33 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families September; throughout the year First day notices, parent handbooks, lunch information, general school information, school protocol, school calendar, ENL Entitlement Letters After School program information, testing information, middle school applications, meeting reminders and announcements, event flyers September throughout the school year Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translation and Interpretation Unit DOE intranet. (Intranet to send home notices and letters to parents, translation and interpretation unit for non covered languages. 3  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Translation and Interpretation Unit; DOE intranet. N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Talk Time Parent-Teacher Conference Curriculum Night N/A N/A N/A Wednesday Mornings September, November, March, May September N/A N/A N/A interpretation service(s)? Over the phone translation; bilingual staff members; translator's as needed. Bilingual staff members; translators as needed. Bilingual staff members; translators as needed, in house translators, translation and interpretation unit, DOE vendor for non covered languages. N/A N/A N/A 4  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our ENL teacher is and proficient in Russian, the home language of most students and families. Furthermore, in the vent of a school emergency emails are sent in multiple languages, would utilize various translators apps). The information will also be posted in our school website, phone calls will also be made through translation and interpretation unit. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional development provided by District Field Support Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) • P.S. 8 Fulfills Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services at the ELL parent meeting. At this meeting the parents are given documents in their native language informing them about the ENL program offered at P.S. 8. The document also states other programs that are available for their child at other schools if they should choose a program we do not offer. Parents are given a copy of the Parent Bill of Rights and Responsibilities, which explain their entitlement to translation. Parents also receive a school safety plan in case of emergency in their native language with all important school procedures. At parent meetings, parents are also informed of how to access the DOE website to read more about ELL parent rights. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? P.S. 8 will use a parent survey to gather feedback about service availability and we will adjust our practices according to the needs of the parents. 5 
