 31R034 School Name: I.S. 034 TOTTENVILLE Principal: JOHN BOYLE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information Totten Intermediate School 31R034 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 353100010034 6-8 528 Academy Avenue 718-477-4500 School Number (DBN): 718-227-4074 Fax: Ashley Bulko abulko@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: John Boyle Ann Verderber Mina DePaolo Email Address: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 31 Superintendent’s Office Address: Cynthia Carbone-Yue Gary Tames N/A N/A N/A District Information Vincenza Gallassio Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace VGallas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5657 Phone Number: 718-420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Staten Island FSC: Executive Director: 715 Ocean Terrace TBA Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-755-7339 Phone Number: 212-374-5585 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) John Boyle Ann Verderber Cindy CarboneYue Judith Wagner Gary Tames Kim Demorato Carol Digregorio *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Assistant Principal / Chairperson Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name PatriciaColadonato Kathleen Barzal Donna Ciccotto DanielleCarire Leslie Knutsen Dawn Picciano AntoinetteCiacciarelli Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: I.S.34R is committed to creating a safe and caring environment that will promote academic excellence at each student's individual level. Students will be encouraged to discover the interdisciplinary relationships that exist in their studies. During a pupil's tenure at our school, we will promote healthy social interactions and self-esteem while fostering techniques to empower future learning and imparting a love for learning.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Totten Intermediate School is a large, thriving middle school located in the Tottenville section of Staten Island. Our school services over 1150 students.We are very much a neighborhood school with strong roots in our community. Many of our parents were once students at Totten. As a school, we take great pride in the role we have played as a Learning Partners Plus School. Initially we joined the program in 2013 as a partner school. The following year our school was the only partner school selected to join the ranks as a host school. We are currently the recipient of a LPP Continuation Grant and have developed collaborative, innovative projects spanning across our ELA, STEM, and self-contained classrooms with seven schools within our district The work our cohort produced has yielded many measurable improvements to teacher pedagogy, challenged student thinking with demonstrated results and has allowed the teachers in the cohort to build their leadership skills. Other partnerships that support our work of developing rigorous instruction and collaborative teaching include: College Access for All, Algebra for All, Bike NYC, Urban Advantage, Roundabout Theater, United Activities Unlimited, Educational Networks, Glogster, NYC Partnership for Parks, March of Dimes, School Messenger and PupilPath. Our expanded focus is centered on empowering students, bridging the divide that exists between elementary and middle school and enhancing the STEM Programs.By creating a grade-wide stem program, all 100% of 6th grade students will experience STEM by the time they graduate. We are showcasing our work with Virtual Reality, Code Writing, Engineering and Video Game Design. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Totten has a large special needs population of 326 students having an IEP. Special student populations at Totten Intermediate School include special education and accelerated programs. Each of these populations’ needs are met in a variety of ways. Specifically, special education students are provided different programs such as self-contained or ICT classroom settings and New York State Alternate Assessment. To ensure that these students excel in their classroom settings opportunities such as Bike NYC are incorporated into their learning experiences. Special programs for the 12:1 population include the student-led Snack Shack and the sensory room for students. Totten has 32 ELLs in the ENL push-in/push out program. The students language proficiency ranges from entering to commanding. The students require a variety of strategies in order to enhance their language acquisition. The program allows the students to concentrate on enhancing their strengths in their native language and transferring it over to their new acquired language. Some of the strategies include scaffolding and building on students' prior knowledge In effort to pave a pathway to improve their skills and achieve success in their new language. 0  In addition to these opportunities provided for the special education population, other curriculum enhancements afforded to the accelerated population include the, Urban Advantage, Regents courses, and advanced ELA curriculum. Urban Advantage creates a connection between urban public school systems and science cultural institutions such as zoos, botanical gardens, museums and science centers. At Totten, Regents courses include Integrated Algebra, Living Environment, Earth Science and U.S. History & Government. By completing and passing these courses and a Regents exam, students can earn high school credits allowing them to advance to higher level courses. Our advanced ELA curriculum consists of 9 th and 10 th grade units of study. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. This past year, our school has made the most progress in the element of Rigorous Instruction with the continued use of Success Criteria in our curriculum. Teachers and students have a clear understanding of the standards and the paths to achieve mastery. To meet the high-expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards, students are encouraged to struggle productively. Through their productive struggle, students become independent, but collaborate with others effectively through peer assessment. Working towards our school’s mission statement, students are encouraged to self-assess their learning, choose a resource most beneficial to their specific needs and build their toolkit to bridge the productive struggle and understanding of standards. Our school’s key element of focus for this school year is Collaborative Teachers. Through careful collaboration between colleagues, elementary school and high school teachers, one main goal is to ease the transition between grades 5 through 9. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R034 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1091 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 80 77 8 30 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 38 39 10 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 34.0% % Attendance Rate 28.0% % Reduced Lunch 2.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 11.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 83.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.11 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 64.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO NO NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 244 245 9 92.6% 6.0% 27.5% 0.6% 4.0% 0.5% 8 32% 6.8 66.5% 68% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A NO N/A YES N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After a comprehensive assessment of the 2018-2019 incoming 6th grade preference sheets, 87.3% of our incoming 6 th grade students chose STEM as a first/second choice option. This is an increase of 43% from the 2017 school year. As a result, we recognized a need to increase the capacity of the STEM program to reach a broad population over an extended period of time. Areas of strength include: Students engage in inquiry based learning Formative/Summative Assessments drive instruction Initiation of "STEM FOR ALL"   Our STEM program has been showcased to a number of our feeder schools and partner schools  All STEM units are aligned to Common Core Standards   Differentiated instruction embedded into all STEM units of study and lesson plans   All units are fueled by high level questioning in an effort to establish rigor across all content areas   Planning sessions for principals to brainstorm incorporation of STEM into their schools.  Teacher-led professional development with science and math teachers for feeder and partner schools in an Student-centered classroom environment showcased for the Gates foundation  effort to create scaffolding for curriculum for 2nd through 8th grade STEM. STEM teacher works with SIBFSC to construct new makerspaces, and to provide feedback for curriculum development district-wide.  VISIT program allows I.S. 34R to visit SI Tech for "A Day in the Life" of the STEM program Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 2% increase in NYS math scores for all 6th grade students who will have had a full year of STEM education as measured by NYS Item Skills Analysis Report. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Activities/Strategies All students All students All students All students All students All students Students Parents/ Guardians Teachers/Model Teachers/ Administration Administration/Parents/Guardians 1. Analyze gaps and trends quarterly as identified in our 2017 NYS ELA/math item skills analysis report, performance tasks, DRP Assessment, school-created benchmarks and performance tasks, classroom formative assessments to formulate student personal goals. 2. Classroom instruction designed to meet the class and student goals. Students and teachers unpack the standards and create checklists in accordance with the Bloomberg Success Criteria Protocol. Inquiry cycles done on a weekly basis continue to monitor and reflect the needs of our students by analyzing students’ progress towards mastery of the content and Common Core Standards. Design coherent instruction by continuing to develop uniform assessments, benchmark assessments, performance tasks, rubrics, and units of study, as well as other tools to enable teachers to organize and analyze student performance trends to drive instruction and curriculum. Quarterly Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 Weekly Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 Two sets of 8 half days Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 Daily Starting 9/18 and Teachers, Teacher Teams, Model Teachers, Coaches, Model Teachers Teachers, Teacher Teams, Model Teachers, Coaches, Supervisor Teachers, Coach Administration, Coach, Teachers Administration, Coach, Model Teachers, Teachers 4  3. Continuation of Algebra for All program with hands-on in class coaching (two sets of 8 half days) 4. Meet the individual needs of students by designing differentiated instruction daily to meet targeted needs while monitoring students’ progress towards mastery of the content and Common Core Standards. Strategies include but are not limited to the following -Student/teacher created "stuck charts" - Signposts for both fiction/nonfiction - Discussion builders/sentence starters - MICE (writing strategy) - Checklists - Personal toolkits 5. Students will monitor their own progress through self and peer assessment protocols weekly, fueled by students' understanding of where they are, where they're going and how they will get there on the learning continuum. 6. Align professional development sessions to support the STEM program. The daily goals include: -Unpacking the standards so that there is a clear understanding of the "asks" of the standard and recognizing the obstacles that need to be overcome to achieve mastery. -Continuing to build upon student tool kits ending 6/19 Teachers, Coach, Media Specialist Teachers, Coach Teachers, Teacher Teams Teachers, Model Teachers, Teacher Ambassadors Administration, Coach, Teachers, Media Specialist, Parents/ Guardians Weekly Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 Daily Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 Daily Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 Monthly Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 Two times a year Starting 9/18 and 5 ending 6/19 Two times a year Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 -Creating self-monitoring criteria for students to take ownership of their learning. -Creating a continuum as a tool for visible learning where students have the ability to progress towards mastery of a standard - Unpacking Next Generation standards 7. Continue to involve our Media Specialist in curriculum design and roll-out as a daily support across STEM through input into professional development, mentoring, and research of relevant materials needed by the Coach, Model Teachers and Teachers. 8. Engage students in productive struggle by creating and implementing monthly inquiry-based tasks with scaffolds to ensure the tasks are accessible to all learners. Students research math and science in an effort to create student-led discoveries through experimentation. 9. Staten Island Tech "Visit" program: Students experience high school STEM in a real learning environment 10. Teachers create monthly units around Mosamack and Knowatom to encourage students to hypothesize and build on results from hands-on activities. 11. Teacher and students work with Staten Island Borough Field Support Center (SIBFSC) to develop a giant makerspace by providing feedback and suggestions for budget and materials. 6  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent engagement newsletters known as "What's Happening" curriculum guides are posted monthly through Pupilpath and IS34.org. Media specialist is responsible for the implementation of the newsletters and assistant principal Ashley Bulko oversees the distribution from September 2018 through June 2019. The STEM program is celebrated during "Back to School Night, Parent Teacher Conferences and our Curriculum Night on a monthly or weekly basis from September 2018 through June 2019. Key personnel include: Two full time STEM teachers, Media specialist, parent coordinator, model teachers, PTA, administration, and guidance. Administration oversees all nightly activities and events while teachers are responsible for the implementation of any activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Learning time, common planning, instructional rounds, “Looking at student work” sessions, and model teachers. Per session is necessary for presentation planning by STEM department. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● In February 2019, there will be 1% increase in our 6 th grade math scores evidenced by the Performance Task for all students in the 6th grade STEM program. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Math Performance Tasks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to 2017 Learning Environment Survey, 64% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers support them when they are upset. I.S. 34R has created a learning environment that is student-centered where students support each other in a collaborative and supportive environment that supports the social and emotional growth of all students. As a result of this supportive environment, our Learning Environment Survey our school scored 89%, 9% above the city average for Supportive Environment in the Safety category. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As of June 2019, our school's Learning Environment Survey will reveal a 2% increase in students who feel their teachers support them when they are upset. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, Teacher Teams, Model Teachers, Coaches, Model Teachers, Guidance, SAPIS Worker, Student Support Services, ESL Teacher Teachers, Teacher Teams, Model Teachers, Coaches, Model Teachers, Guidance, SAPIS Worker, Student Support Services, Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principals, Principal Meet the social-emotional and academic needs of students by designing differentiated instruction to meet targeted needs while monitoring students’ progress towards mastery of the content and Common Core Standards. Resources are readily available for students to refer to throughout the lesson to support differentiation and help build their personal toolkit. All Students Daily Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 All Students Daily, Weekly and Monthly Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19  The S.O.A.R. program,where students are recognized monthly for outstanding academic, social, and community successes  Decrease use of the SAVE Room from 5 days to 2 days a week.  Continuation of College Access for All program for all 7th grade students through weekly RTI instruction with guest speakers and visits to S.I. universities.  Continuation of cabinet by The Assistant Principal of Student Support Services which includes Student Support Service, guidance counselors and the SAPIS Worker.  Continuation of a guidance- based approach to discipline  The use of Remind (a text messaging service) and class accounts informs parents/guardians and students of any classroom announcements.  Meet the social-emotional and academic needs of students by designing differentiated instruction to meet targeted needs while monitoring students’ progress towards mastery of the content and Common Core Standards on a daily basis.  Make resources readily available for students to refer to throughout the lesson to support differentiation and help build their personal toolkits throughout the units.  We have held grade cohesion assemblies to establish school-wide coherence for school environment on a quarterly basis.  Back To School Night and Curriculum Nights for Humanities, Math and Science each Fall. 9   Student Impact Team meets monthly throughout the year to reflect on performance tasks, units of study and school environment  Too Good for Drugs Program offered to all 7th grade students on weekly basis and an end of year ceremony and celebration of the program  Professional development for teachers on special populations such as LBGTQ students  Eagle Society celebrates the students who provide extraordinary school service. The success of the society is evident through teacher feedback and nominations. Ceremony in June parents and students assembly  The use of PupilPath to relay timely information regarding student assessments, homework, and behavior  Workshop for Parents on Back to School Night to explain Pupilpath  Allotting (Other Professional Work) time on a weekly basis to communicate with parents.  Parent representation on the School Leadership Team.  Guidance continues their Academic Intervention Plan (Circular 12-Guidance-based Approach)  Guidance-based approach 1. Each marking period guidance meets with teachers who have identified students who are failing for the term. 2. Guidance meets with administration, teachers and set up academic intervention plan. 3. Guidance executes and oversees the intervention plan with all parties involved (parents, student, teachers, guidance) 4. Guidance notifies teachers - biweekly communication with parent 5. Weekly non-mandated guidance sessions 6. Academic daily report that is submitted to guidance counselor 7. Weekly peer tutoring 8. Student Support Cabinet meets twice a month to address concerns of all students with a special focus on emerging social-emotional concerns. 9. Student Implementation team meets once a month to discuss students who may need more support and would benefit from intervention. 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Curriculum Night twice a year celebrates the work done with guidance and at risk populations on a monthly or weekly basis from September 2018 through June 2019. Back to School Night includes a workshop hosted by Guidance focusing on socio-emotional issues that may be presented throughout the year. Key personnel include: Student support team, parent coordinator, PTA, administration, and guidance, SAPIS counselor, YMCA youth program and Student Support Services. Administration oversees all activities and events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Learning time, common planning, instructional rounds, “Looking at student work” sessions, model teachers, Sapis counseling, YMCA program, guidance-led professional development, and OPW parent communication time. Per session for presentation planning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be at least a 1% increase in the number of students who feel supported by teachers when they are upset as indicated by Survey Monkey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey Monkey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017 Learning Environment Survey, 69% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools. As the recipient of the Learning Partners Continuation Grant, I.S. 34R heavily emphasizes teacher leadership and student voice. Teachers meet a once or twice a month to share best practices and develop curriculum. By establishing a collaborative culture for learning, Instructional leaders, teacher teams, staff and students have strategically and systematically communicated high expectations, encouraging students and teachers to work collaboratively toward improving student achievement. School leaders and staff are unwavering in their commitment to high standards of classroom practice through ongoing professional learning and intentional and individualized support. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of all collaborative teacher teams focusing on the development and implementation of teacher led professional development opportunities there will be a 5% increase from last year in the number of teacher-led workshops and professional learning sessions offered. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). -Teacher-led workshop on Next Generation standards. Teachers analyze the discrepancies in the new standards and finding ways to incorporate these changes into our current units of study. -ELA and Math teachers piloting the use of Google Classroom in the 6th and 8th grade. Teachers meet to discuss glows and grows within the practice. -Team of teachers formed a committee to implement promotional criteria to support the district-driven movement to create clearly defined and transparent system Everyone held to the standard. Clearly defined high expectations for all. - Our administrative and instructional teams have worked closely with our School Based Staff Development Committee to ensure that all professional learning is relevant to all participating parties. -Provide teachers with a needs assessment survey twice a year regarding professional development they would like to participate in -End of year meeting focused on reflection of year's work. Celebrations and next steps are displayed through a gallery walk. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff Monthly Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 All teachers, Coaches, Administration Two times a year Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 3  -As a cabinet, we have recognized pedagogical best practices throughout the building and have invited teachers to share their best practices monthly with staff during professional learning. -Continuation of Algebra for All with Australian mentor Leigh Harrod at the end of the school year. -MSQI Roundtable Professional Learning Workshop turn-keyed to staff by model teachers twice a year. -AT the start of the school year, school leaders work collaboratively with each group to create three school-wide bottom lines reflecting each group’s commitment to the work. -Continued use of strategic, monthly teacher-led professional development focus on teacher strengths through “a la carte” menus based on best practices observed through teacher intervisitation as well as through informal and formal observations conducted by school leaders. -Through a well-defined instructional focus including teacher bottom-lines, teachers have committed to ongoing reflection and monthly refinement of their practices. -Model teacher led success criteria workshop to encourage teacher collaboration on units of study each marking period. -Common planning embedded into teachers schedule to ensure that teachers have time to collaborate and share best practices and analyze student progress. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 4  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent engagement newsletters known as "What's Happening" curriculum guides are created monthly by the media specialist from September 2018 through June 2019 through Pupilpath and IS34.org. Administration oversees the distribution of the newsletter through Pupilpath. High School Articulation night, Back to School Night, Parent Teacher Conferences, High School Information Night, and our Curriculum Night that demonstrates teacher collaboration around best practices within a unit of study. Key personnel include: Teachers and parapfrofessionals, media specialist, parent coordinator, model teachers, PTA, administration, and guidance, SAPIS counselor. Administration oversees all evening events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Learning time, common planning, instructional rounds, “Looking at student work” sessions, model teachers, and video sharing. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be 5% increase in the number of teacher led PDs as measured by Survey Monkey Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey Monkey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017 Learning Environment Survey only 63% of our staff responded that a lot or all of their students respond to challenging questions in class. An area of strength in the category of Effective School Leadership according to the 2017 Learning Environment Survey 73% of the teachers feel they have a great deal of influence over school policy in the area of developing instructional materials. Our shared leadership model ensures that teachers play a key role in key decisions that affect student learning across the school, and results in improvements in Common Core aligned instructional practice, and increased student achievement for all learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, as a result of monthly student government meetings with the principal, there will be an increase of 5% in the number of staff members who believe their students respond to challenging questions in class. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The Consultative Committee will meet monthly to provide feedback and next steps for the academic programs and extra curricular activities, along with staff concerns and union issues. Assistant principals continuously provide actionable next steps after classroom observations to teachers in order for them to enhance their planning and execution of questions as well as an array of strategies to promote student discussion and participation. In addition, lessons are embedded within the curriculum in order to promote a culture within the classroom so students feel comfortable questioning what they don't understand about the standards. Principal Boyle and assistant principal Tames meet monthly with student government to address needs and concerns of student body. Students are asked about level of difficulty of performance tasks, benchmarks, and texts in an effort to ensure that work is challenging and meaningful. The Student Impact Team meets monthly to provide feedback on assessments, impact on student learning, environment and culture. After Student Impact teams meet monthly with model teachers feedback is shared with departments and used to tweak curriculum. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, Administrators, Students and Staff Monthly Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 Principal, Assistant Principals ,teachers, students Teachers and Students Monthly Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 Principal, Assistant Principals,Teachers and Students 7  Monthly check-ins/reflection of school-developed Stem-based programs including Virtual Reality, Code Writing, Engineering and Video Game Design. Administration, Teachers and Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers and Students Monthly Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent engagement newsletters known as "What's Happening" curriculum guides are posted monthly monthly by the media specialist through Pupilpath and IS34.org. High School Articulation night, Back to School Night to celebrate the STEM focus, Parent Teacher Conferences, High School Information Night, and our Curriculum Night that demonstrates teacher collaboration . The Consultative Committtee and Student Impact Teams meet monthly to address significant issues of concern. Key personnel include: Teachers and parapfrofessionals, media specialist, parent coordinator, model teachers, PTA, administration, and guidance, SAPIS counselor, STEM teachers, UFT representative. Administration oversees all evening events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Learning time, common planning, instructional rounds, “Looking at student work” sessions, and model teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in teachers who who believe their students respond to challenging questions in class as measured by the 2017 Learning Environment Survey. Progress will be monitored through Survey Monkey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey Monkey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017 Learning Environment Survey, there was a 13% increase in the number of parents who agreed or strongly agreed that the school regularly communicates with them about their children. This increase confirms our beliefs that our action plan is effective. Therefore, we would like to maintain or increase our parent percentage in this category. An area of strength in the category of Strong Family and Community Ties on the 2017 Learning Environment Survey is that 90% of parents or guardians agreed or strongly agreed that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn.Our shared leadership model ensures that communities play a key role in decisions that affect student learning across the school, and results in improvements in Common Core aligned instructional practice, and increased student achievement for all learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will Increase by at least 2% the percentage of parents who believe that staff regularly communicates with parents/guardians about how staff can help students learn as measured by the 2017 Learning Environment Survey. 9 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students Monthly Staff Community Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 Teachers, Teacher Teams, Model Teachers, Coaches, Model Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Daily/Weekly Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  1. Communicate with families to support their understanding and involvement of rigorous instruction and their understanding of the ELA and Math Common Core Standards so that they are better equipped to support their children at home. Parent Communication Strategies include:  The use of Remind (a text messaging service) and class Instagram accounts informs parents/guardians and students of any classroom announcements as needed throughout the year.  Daily/weekly updates to Educational Networks.  Daily/weekly updates to School Messenger System to relay pertinent and timely information to all families.  The use of Pupil Path to relay timely information regarding student assessments, homework, and behavior.  A Parent Advisory Committee consisting of parents and administration meets monthly to support the needs of students and families.  OPW Workshops offered to parents centered around curriculum work and strategy-based learning  Allotting OPW (Other Professional Work) time on a weekly basis to communicate with parents.  Conduction of a yearly parent workshop on Pupil Path.  Parent representation on the School Leadership Team through monthly meetings.  Parents as Effective Partners workshops where teachers open their classrooms to parents for a hands-on learning experience for each unit of study offered once per unit of study.  The continued use of "What's Happening" language arts and math curriculum newsletters sent monthly via PupilPath to inform parents about upcoming units of study and to provide sample questions and strategies to support their children. 0   PTA meets monthly to keep parents abreast about upcoming school and community events, curriculum updates, and information regarding state testing and regents exams 2. Continue utilizing resources from the community to support academic growth: Students Monthly  Creating and producing a monthly student-generated college fair June - Hosted P.S. 1's Family Carnival on our fields  Mother's Day Market created to engage community   Art and STEM showcase night  Literacy, math, and science nights where parents and students engage in learning activities to showcase best practices and protocols. Staff Community Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19  Big Kids Night provides an open house for the Tottenville community to celebrate the performing arts, music, and technology programs. Supporting parents with Back to School night and Parent Teacher conferences   NYC, Urban Advantage and Discovery Learning   Evening alumni concert on school field with free Incentivizing healthy living with Bike NYC admission for community  Our marching band opened up the Totten Civic Association Flag Day parade and the St. Patrick's Day parade Student-led community beach cleanup in coordination with NYC Partnership for Parks program.  3. Providing extracurricular resources for students: Students Once a year  School plays, partnerships and field trips with Round-about Theater Staff  Opportunities for the marching band to participate in Community Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 Teachers, Teacher Teams, Model Teachers, Coaches, Model Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Teachers, Teacher Teams, Model Teachers, Coaches, Model Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Guidance, Special Education Liaison community parades  Engaging activities and academic support with UAU and STEM.  Trip with the self-contained students to Harvest Cafe. Students tour the facility run by developmentally disabled adults under the direction of A Very Special Place. Students interact with employees and get hands-on experience. 4. Continued parent-teacher-association involvement and support: Spring Auction   Activities, book fairs, and the school fashion show. Staff Community 1 Students Once a year Teachers, Teacher Teams, Model Teachers, Coaches, Model Teachers,  Representation on School Leadership Team 5. School Leadership Team addresses and solicits opportunities for parents to volunteer for upcoming school and community events and extra-curricular activities. Parent Coordinator, Guidance Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 Monthly Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 Students Monthly Staff Community Starting 9/18 and ending 6/19 Teachers, Teacher Teams, Model Teachers, Coaches, Model Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Guidance 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parent engagement newsletters known as "What's Happening" curriculum guides are posted monthly by media specialist from September 2018 through June 2019 through Pupilpath and IS34.org. High School Articulation night, Back to School Night to open up Totten to the community, Parent Teacher Conferences, High School Information Night, and our Curriculum Night that demonstrates community engagement . Key personnel include: Teachers, media specialist, parent coordinator, model teachers, PTA, administration, and guidance, SAPIS counselor, and band members. Administration oversees all events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Learning time, common planning, instructional rounds, “Looking at student work” sessions, and model teachers. Per session needed to implement plan. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will Increase by 2% the percentage of parents who believe that staff regularly communicates with parents/guardians about how staff can help students learn as measured by Survey Monkey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2  Survey Monkey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Response To Intervention (RTI) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day Small Group Instruction Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) The Academic Intervention Service Teachers identify students based on the data found on "looking at student work" results, Student Impact Team discussions, ELAP, PupilPath,DRP, and NYS ELA Exam, benchmark and baseline assessments. This service is offered to students in grades 6, 7 and 8. The AIS teacher develops lessons to support English Language Arts units of study which target students’ needs and strengthen student performance using the Holt McDougal. SETSS teachers use programs such as , MSQI Toolkit, as supplements to support the individual needs of students. MSQI designated a coach to support struggling readers and model reciprocal reading and Socratic seminars. Additionally, test prep materials are utilized to target basic foundation skills and strategies. We have continued to add to our Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) TheAcademic Intervention teacher works in small groups of 5:1 or individualized 1:1 approach. Also, paraprofessionals work alongside AIS teachers and classroom teachers during small group instruction to support targeted students. AIS is provided during the school day. The AIS teachers “push in” to Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classrooms. The identified students work on reading and writing skills. The AIS teacher focuses on deficit areas and provides strategies, tools/resources, and review sheets to help improve student performance . "What's Happening" newsletter is a resource for parents and students to know what the upcoming unit will include. Sample questions, resources, links and strategies are a part of the newsletter. 4 Response To Intervention (RTI) During the school day Small Group Instruction Response To Intervention (RTI) During the school day Small Group Instruction Mathematics Science student toolkitswith nonfictionsignposts for students to use. The Academic Intervention Service Teachers identify students based on the data found on ELAP, PupilPath, DRP, Benchmark assessments, Baseline Assessment and NYS Mathematics Exam. This service is offered to students in grades 6, 7 and 8. The AIS teachers “push in” to Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classrooms. The identified students work on improving basic math foundation and strengthening problem solving skills. These mathematics enrichment programs are used as supplements to support student learning. The Student Implementation Team (SIT) at I.S. 34, work collaboratively to identify students who meet the criteria for intervention services. The identified students are grouped according to their individual needs and receive Academic Intervention Services. The AIS teacher works in small groups of 5:1 or individualized 1:1 approach. Also, paraprofessionals work alongside AIS teachers and classroom teachers during small group instruction to support targeted students. AIS is provided during the school day. The AIS teachers “push in” to Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classrooms. The identified students work on mathematics skills. The AIS teacher focuses on deficit areas and provides strategies, tools/resources, and review sheets to help improve student performance. The AIS teachers work with small groups and/or 1:1 basis where they differentiate instruction and provide use of manipulatives and/or graphic organizers to support student progress. In addition, AIS teachers, classroom teachers and paraprofessionals work alongside students to assist in the completion of mandated performance tasks and uniform writing assignments during the school year. We had great success with the College Access for All and the Urban Advantage Science Program. This program allows our students to 5  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) experience the vast cultural resources available to them as New Yorkers. As a part of our students experience they enjoy visits to Staten Island Zoo, Museum of Natural History, Harvest Cafe, Liberty Science Center and various other facilities in the Tri-State area. The AIS teachers work with small groups and/or on a 1:1 basis where they differentiate instruction and provide manipulatives (rulers, maps/globes, flash cards) and/or graphic organizers to support student progress. In addition, AIS teachers, classroom teachers and paraprofessionals work alongside students to assist in the completion of mandated performance tasks and uniform writing pieces during the school year. Guidance Counselor Strategies used by the guidance team include:  The guidance team meets weekly to discuss at risk students and to proactively address small issues before they become larger ones. Counselors are also in communication with staff members and parents to identify and discuss concerns. The Student Implementation Team (SIT) at I.S. 34, work collaboratively to identify students who meet the criteria for intervention services. The identified students are grouped according to their individual needs and receive Academic Intervention Services. Guidance Counselor At risk services are provided during the school day for middle school students who struggle academically, socially and emotionally. Students who require at risk guidance services are identified in the following ways:  By the School Implementation Team (which meets monthly). Response To Intervention (RTI) During the school day Small Group Instruction During the school day Individual Meetings Small Group Instruction  At the request  During non- of the parent or guardian. mandated guidance sessions, counselors work 6   Referred by a staff member  At the requestof the student themselves.  Guidance /teacher meetings at the end of each marking period  Monitoring ATSand Pupilpath data School Psychologist: The primary role of the school psychologist is to evaluate students who are referred to the School Assessment Team. In addition, the school psychologist is a part of the School Implementation Team, where they advise appropriate at risk efforts for identified “at risk” students. The SIT consults with parents and provides techniques for assisting their children with academic issues or refer them to tutorial programs, treatment and evaluation facilities beyond what is available inside the Department of Education. Also, at risk students are referred to school social worker and guidance counselors for additional support. Academic intervention services are available during the day and if in an emergency or crisis with student to identify the areas of weakness.  Counselor andstudent developappropriate goals for students to work toward. Strategies to reachtheir goal are put in place Student and Counselor meet weekly, biweekly or daily depending on the students' needs  In addition to incorporating these strategies into academic, social, and emotional intervention plans, the above strategies are also infused into the Guidance-based approach to discipline. Guidance counselors collaborate with the other members of the Student Support Service team to provide students with an alternative approach to the handling and management of disciplinary issues. This guidance based approach to discipline has greatly reduced the number of students who are repeatedly placed on Principal Suspension. The guidance counselors provide support groups in the areas of self-esteem enhancement, peer pressure resistance, interpersonal relations, conflict resolution methodology, decision-making skills and career development issues. The support groups for at risk students are held during lunch periods and non-7  situation arises they are available to assist our students. Social Worker: Students are referred to the social worker by teachers, other students or students’ themselves. The social worker frequently consults and advises teachers on how to address the targeted students’ needs and/or behaviors. In some cases, the social worker makes referrals for treatment outside of the school system and provides additional support for parents. In addition, the social worker serves on the Student Implementation Team provides feedback and strategies to support students at risk. mandated periodsfor all three grade levels. Confidentiality is of utmost importance however teachers and administrators are consulted when it is in the best interest of the student. The guidance counselor pushes into classrooms and facilitates lessons pertaining to but not limited to conflict resolution, decision making, self-esteem enhancement and peer pressure resistance. Evaluations are ongoing; interventions are changed and or terminated when specified. Our SAPIS counselor provides individual and small group instruction to at risk students in an effort to improve their overall performance. We also found a correlation between students at risk and in need of counseling and students that are in need of AIS. Our SAPIS counselor is able to expertly provide both services to these targeted students. In some situations parents/guardians are encouraged to seek outside services for their children. Furthermore, our guidance counselors serve as core members of our School Safety Committee which analyze data and trends regarding incidents of school safety inside our school. The data gathered is used to proactively intervene and staff areas of concern throughout our school in an effort to 8  reduce disciplinary infractions. School Psychologist: The SIT consults with parents and provides techniques for assisting their children with academic issues or refer them to tutorial programs, treatment and evaluation facilities beyond what is available inside the Department of Education. Also, at risk students are referred to school social worker and guidance counselors for additional support. Academic intervention services are available during the day and if in an emergency or crisis situation arises they are available to assist our students. Social Worker: The school social worker counsels at risk students on a weekly basis either in a 1:1 setting or small group. Students are referred to the social worker by teachers, other students or students’ themselves. 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 8 Doubled Up, 2 in a shelter, 1 in a temporary housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0 At-risk guidance counseling, school supplies, school trips and gym uniforms are provided for these students. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $6,540 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Column B Section Reference(s) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 3  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  4   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Totten Intermediate School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. N/A Totten Intermediate School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 6  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; 7  ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Totten Intermediate School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. N/A I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Ensure access to State Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; 8  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 9  ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 0  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Pare nt Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name Totten Intermediate School Borough Staten Island School Number 034 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal John Boyle Coach Teresa Amorelli ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Rosanna Verga Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Giovanna Palma Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal Ashley Bulko Coach School Counselor Theresa Russo Parent Cindy Yue-PTA Pres Parent Coordinator Diane Cunsolo Field Support Center Staff Member Enrico Domingo Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 2 Total number of ELLs 31 ELLs as share of total student population (%) %  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The literary skills of our ELLs are assessed periodically thoughout the school year utilizing different tools; DRP, Lightsail and teacher-made assessments. These assessments which are given 2-3 times a year help determine a student's lexile reading score. The data acquired is used to provide students with purposeful instruction geared to the levels at which they are performing. The data is used to construct lessons such as vocabulary focus or picture to word associations, write IEP goals, create classroom goals, implement small group instruction, as well as whole class instruction. Based on their scores and ELL levels, students are partnered or grouped to help meet individual needs, always focusing to improve a struggling modality. Our informal reading conferences and unit tasks are teacher created assessments where the teacher works closely with the students on their individual listening, reading, writing, and speaking skills. The teacher creates assessments that match each level of the students' performance goals and targets the modality that students struggle with. For example, from the data collected from our Entering and Emerging ELLs, it can be noted that the students can pronounce the words , some with ease, but have no comprehension of the text.. To help them build on their comprehension students practice using specific 3  reading strategies to breakdown the presented text. The data collected from these assessments, such as their reading level, helps the teacher design lessons geared towards their weaknesses in the classroom. Additional modifications are made in both the freestanding and push-in lessons for each individual ELL to drive them to meet their goals. For example some literary text is translated into the native language, during pull out sessions, for a better understanding and in order for students to follow classroom instruction and to perform the daily task. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To ensure all assessments are purposeful to the needs of the students, there are various structures in place For example, our ENL teacher plans with other content-specific teachers during common planning sessions, to ensure strategies, scaffolds, and differentiation are in place to foster the learning environment of our ENL students. The ENL teacher shares appropriate strategies with all teacher's to assist the students at their individual level. The ENL teacher also conferences with OT teachers to further understand difficulties of ELL students and to achieve the best method of instruction for them. The ENL teacher also works in the push-in setting with the current ELLs ENL previews literary text during pull out sessions to facilitate comprehension and maintain focus in class.. Any assessments the students are given in their respective classes have been over viewed by the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher also shares the lexile levels with each teacher to ensure that the students are working with students at their similar level to encourage appropriate academic conversations between the students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to evaluate the success of our freestanding ELL program, we use a diverse amount of informal assessments throughout the school day and year. These assessments include independent activities, essays, tests, quizzes, vocabulary development, benchmarks, and performance tasks. All of these informal assessments are linked by grade level and performance level to the skills the children are developing in their ELA classes. They are also linked to the grade-appropriate Common Core Standards of the student. Our freestanding ELL program is also measured by formal assessments such as the annual student performance on the NYSESLAT. ELL students are expected to demonstrate progress in all indicators and move towards the expanding and ultimately the commanding levels as an end goal. Throughout the year teacher resources, academic instruction, and in class support adheres to the diverse needs of the students. During the2017-2018 school year, four out of our thirty-one ENL students scored at the Commanding Level; thirteen out of the thirty-one students moved up one or two levels. When these results become available, the ENL teacher analyzes the individual score the students received in each of the four tested modalities. The teacher notes the growth in each section and plans lessons and further assessments based on the skills the students exhibit a weakness in. Just as the ELA English speaking students are assessed based on the common core standards, our ENL students are held in the same regard during the NYSESLAT exam, which mirrors the Common Core Standards, and their progress is tracked as well. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? It is imperative for the ENL teacher to analyze the summative data when it is collected in order to understand each child's strengths and weaknesses. As soon as a comprehensive list has been gathered, the ENL teacher shares these strengths and weakenesses with teachers who share the ENL students. It is esential that all the students' teachers work together to apply the best strategies that will meet each ENL student's needs. For students who are struggling well below grade level, we have different forms of academic intervention programs that can be beneficial to their needs. Students who struggle can be pulled from their Arts and Technology classes up to three times per week to help address their needs in a small group setting, with our IEP teacher who knows their struggles. Within these groups, the students will have ongoing practice and support with the skills they are struggling with. It imperative that all teachers are aware of the difficulties that ELLs encounter on an every day basis which affects them both academically and socially. Additionally, students will also be grouped with other students who have similar struggles so they can work in groups or pairs to have academic conversations that can also foster their growth. Students will be continually assessed throughout the year to determine their new skill level and to track advancements and any struggles that may still exist. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 4  N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Most of our ELL's scored at the Expanding/Transitioning level and have the ability to test out within two years and show enormous growth both academically and socially. This year two of our ELLs, in the country for less than two years, have been inducted into our Arista Society. Our ELL's score proficient in both speaking and listening skills but struggle with reading and writing skills on the NYSESLAT. Vocabulary is a strong focus because comprehension is greatly minimized by lack of grade level vocabulary. The periodic lexile scores and writing assessments reveal the same data as the NYSESLAT. To deal with these deficiencies, instruction is focused primarily on reading, writing and basic literary skills aligned with the Common Core Standards. The Math , Social Studies and Science teachers implement instructional strategies that align with the English instruction to improve both reading and writing scores. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to disseminate these findings to make adjustments to our ENL program, our ENL teacher works very closely with our student and teacher programmer. Once the data is collected and students are placed with their respective teachers, the ENL teacher meets with each group of teachers to discuss the levels of each of the students. Often times, the ENL teacher will be placed to push-in with some of these teachers to provide additional strategies, small group, and one-on-one support to the students who need it. ENL students benefit by small group instruction and one-on-one instruction because it allows students to speak freely and acquire more confidence. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The organizational model is a stand-alone/pull-out program. ELL's are placed according to NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores. All ELL'S are serviced as per LAP mandates. In grades 6 through 8, the students are placed in upgraded, heterogeneous groups in the pull-out model. This type of grouping is very effective because our groups do not exceed 9 students per session. Therefore, the teacher often has the time to focus on each student individually and allows students to boost their confidence in speaking in a classroom setting. In the push-in model, the teacher services our students during their ELA classes which is very beneficial for the students because they receive guided instruction from our ENL teacher and gain the benefits of being in an ICT setting. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The mandated instructional minutes are used by the ENL teacher to enhance English language acquisition and apply specific methodologies to serve students daily. All data gathered from interim and annual assessments are analyzed by the 5  ENL teacher to provide essential instruction for the students. The ENL teacher prepares all instruction based on test scores, daily progress, group work, and daily interaction. All the students are on different levels and progress at different levels, therefore each student’s instruction varies. The instruction that is given is to achieve success in the classroom, the state exams , and most importantly acquiring the language for daily socialization. Testing scores are the tools which enable the ENL teacher to group the like students for specific team activities and to pair students at proficiency levels in class. Students scoring at the beginning or intermediate levels receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction. The entitled minutes are determined by scores from the NYSITELL or the NYSESLAT exams. Students scoring at the advanced level receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction. All ELLs also receive 360 minutes of Language Arts instruction in a regular classroom setting. The ENL teacher ensures that the ENL curriculum reinforces the general curriculum of a particular grade. The usage of manipulatives, graphic organizers, and KWL charts, picture-word recognition, familiar to students, aids ELLs in clarifying difficult concepts. Scaffolding strategies are an essential element in ENL instruction as well as in the content area classes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The importance of maintaining goals to improve academic rigor is essential for the success of ELLs in the content area classes. Therefore it is an integral part for the ENL teacher to conference daily with content area teachers. The need to accelerate English language acquisition is at the core of ENL instruction. However maximizing student skills in academic subjects are critical for ELLs to reach the set standards. Therefore, the ENL teacher works in close collaboration with the ELA Math, and other content area teachers to provide strategies and lesson modifications to assist ELLs in the classroom. The ENL teacher is aware of the homework assignments, projects, tests, and reading material being taught in class. Therefore she can help the students to understand and complete various tasks. The ENL teacher reviews tests and differentiates testing material to maximize student success. The teachers inform the ENL teacher regularly on class performance of each student to try to improve their work in class. Totten tries to use performance and demographic data to prepare interim assessments which is an indicator to measure student progress and plan instruction. The ENL teacher together with the content area teachers use bridging, a strategy creating a connection between new concepts and previous knowledge. It allows ELLs to immerse themselves into the lesson and understand the material presented. The ENL teacher uses, when possible, demonstrates a connection between students' language and traditions and the literary text. Modeling is an effective strategy and it is beneficial in all classes. Close reading strategies such as chunking and recognizing of signposts are exceptional tools which improve reading comprehension. The ENL teacher and content area teachers frequently confer regarding ELL classroom performance. When ELLs are experiencing difficulty with material, the ENL teacher explains material and reinforces concepts that are presented in the classroom. Schema building builds understanding by helping students interpret pre-existing concepts of meaning. The language development must be scaffold; therefore, tapping into their prior knowledge and making connections to their daily lives with meaningful activities that they can utilize in the outside world. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language, the ENL teacher ensures that the following assessments are administered in their native language if necessary: NYS Math test for grades 6, 7, and 8. The ENL teacher works closely with our testing department to make sure all of their needs are met appropriately. Content glossaries are insured in the native language during the exam to promote better understanding of the text. Students taking the NYS ELA exam must take the English version of the test. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A.We identify ELLs that have had an interrupted formal education. There are no SIFE students presently enrolled at Totten. However, services would be provided if any were to enroll using the same strategies and methodologies as specified for all our ELLs. SIFE students would be mandated to attend extended day programs. They would be placed in an “at risk” 6  program and set up with a buddy who speaks the same language if at all possible. Instruction in both Math and English would be more intense to try to regain lost academic instruction. B.English language acquisition is critical for newcomers. The ENL teacher uses all the resources available at any grade level to promote language acquisition. This period of transition is a very difficult process for newcomers from any country. Therefore bridging is one of the most effective strategies for ELLs at this level. It is essential that content area teachers are aware of the difficulties that ELLs will incur in the classroom. All teachers should be aware that language acquisition is difficult at this level due to the complexity of the vocabulary. The social issues are also discussed with teachers to ensure that the student feel at ease and comfortable in a classroom setting. Therefore it is critical that the ESL teacher and content area teachers work collaboratively to address the needs of each ELL student in the class. Preparation for the ELA exam in the spring is a priority during both ENL and ELA classes. Again the ENL teacher and the ELA teachers work as a team to introduce new strategies that will aid ELLs achieve success on this exam. The buddy-up system is also very important during this period for ELLs. Not only does it help for academic purposes but eases the social aspect of this transitional period. The students in their regular classes try to aid ELLs socially and academically to make the transition easier. C.ELLs receiving 4 to 6 years of service have difficulty in reading and writing skills. Therefore, our efforts have been to strengthen their comprehension and expose them to more rigorous tasks. Independent reading and reading logs are a daily routine to encourage reading for pleasure and promote vocabulary acquisition. During ENL, the students are exposed to strategies which are introduced in their ELA classes but throughout all their content area classes. The ENL teacher is aligned and enforces such strategies such as inferencing, prior knowledge, citing evidence, the use of signposts in order to strengthen comprehension and to promote better writing skills by using these techniques. D.Long-Term ELLs who are six or years in an ESL /Bilingual program demonstrate that they are taking more than the prescribed amount of time to gain proficiency in English. These students continue with services until they test out with the NYSESLAT. NYSESLAT scores as well as their periodical lexile scores indicate they have difficulty with reading comprehension. Along with texts we have intergrated ELL instructional strategies that will help with their comprehension of English, some strategies are vocabulary development, universal themes, modeling, graphic organizers and visuals. E. Former ELLs are ELL students who have tested out of the ELL program by scoring a commanding on the NYSESLAT for two years. According to the newly revised mandates for ELLs, former ELLs receive 90 minutes of related services in the content area classroom per week. During this time, former ELLs also still have their usual testing accomodations; time extension, separate locations, and usage of bilingual glossaries. They are given review sheets for tests, created by ENL teacher, to aid in their studying. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Some of the strategies incorporated so far are: visualizing, inferencing, making connections to texts, and determining importance. We are strengthening reading strategies for classroom instruction which are predicting, sequencing, modelling, summarizing and questioning. Moreover, we have included also writing strategies which are: graphic organizers, information grid, modeling the text, and citing evidence to support responses to text. The use of the acronym MICECE aids students to plan a short response. All of these strategies accelerate English language development. The strategies incorporated in the content areas were already mentioned. They are: vocabulary and language development, guided interaction, explicit instruction, universal themes, modeling, graphic organizers and visuals. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Currently, we have 13 Special Education students in the ENL program. All students are in a ICT program. Usually all our ELL students come to our school with IEPs. We carefully review the placement of our ELLs into Special Education to ensure academic needs. We rely on teacher assessment of each student's needs, which gives us strong insight regarding their strengths that are reinforced to help them improve their weaknesses. The SWD's acclimate very well in the pull out ENL setting.The SESIS system also allows us to view current changes on students' IEPs which proves to be very effective in determining instruction. The school adheres to all the services mandated by the student's IEP by carefully reviewing all needs and objectives of the student and implementing instructional strategies to reach their intended goals for the year. The SWD's that also receive ENL mandated services which is determined by NYSESLAT scores and they are pulled-out of their non- academic classes to fulfill the required amount of ENL mandated minutes. 7  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted intervention programs for ENL Freestanding is our RTI which focuses on improving Reading/Writing and Math skills. Small group instruction is provided by teachers in the other content area classes for ELLs. The instruction is provided only in English. In the spring ELLs are encouraged to attend the ELA and Math preparation classes to improve their scores on the state tests. Word Generation is an intervention program that IS 34 will launch in the upcoming weeks. This program is designed to focus on language acquisition through the content areas. It provides the opportunity to practice strategies for teaching vocabulary through English, Social Studies, Science and Math. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Paste response to question here: 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently, there are no plans to discontinue any programs/services. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are integrated into all daily activities and programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to support the learning of ELLs in content areas and language development are with: meaningful and real world literary and academic texts, technology used for gathering research information and to develop writing skills, print-rich and visual aides with overheads and charts (T-charts, diagrams, graphic organizers, collaborative activities that involve group projects). The instruction must be modeled with real world materials and often trying to make connections to the native language. The ENL teacher focuses on building reading comprehension skills by utilizing academic vocabulary and complex text during the ENL classes. In addition, all our classrooms have Triumph Boards and many classrooms have sets of Ipads student could use as an additional resource. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The native language support is delivered by the teacher’s usage of visual and print rich materials in their native language. The teacher focuses on modeling literacy skills in the student’s native language with thematic readings in an academic content. Whenever appliacable the ENL teacher connects students students' native traditions to a reading. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ENL classes have mixed grades (up to 2 grade levels) with mixed ages . Our ELLs are all leveled according to their reading and writing scores on the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL. Therefore, the ENL teacher differentiates by examining data and adapting instruction to their needs. Work stations are designed to appropriately focus on the needs of the students. Often the students help each other within the group and easily demonstrate their weaknesses and strengths. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 8  Students attend orientation in the beginning of the year, where an introduction of all the programs and services is discussed. We also have orientation for the incoming 6th graders to introduce them to our school and Art and Technology Departments. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently our school is offering Italian. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1 and 2. Our professional learning plan this year addressed the following topics: Reading and Writing content towards ELA Exam:• Close Reading Strategies• Building Academic Vocabulary• Infusing CCLS in lesson planning with comprehension standards• Integrating word finds and visuals in daily lessons Scaffolding Language:• Engaging students in meaningful work• Learning in group settings• Making meaning explicit with academic language• Differentiated Assessments Integrating Language and Subject learning:• Planning curriculum mapping with thematic units• Developing essential Questions Pedagogues have ongoing professional learning sessions every Monday and Tuesdays during OPW time and during common planning time throughout the week, where strategies and instructional methods are discussed and evaluated to suit the needs of our students. Additionally, our ENL teacher attends professional learning sessions offered by our district and NYCDOE throughout the school year. 3.The support staff has is informative and instructional. All teachers receive the latest scores on ATS. The staff has the latest texts on ELL strategies and during their Common Planning Time, they discuss effective instructional strategies to benefit ELLs. Upon entering middle school, students take part in our “Buddy” Program, where they are paired up with a student who is more proficient in English yet shares their native language in an effort to assist in their transition from elementary school. In an effort to assist ELLs in their transition to High School, students are referred to the peer leadership programs that assist with our SAPIS guidance counselor which helps with their socialization skills. This is imperative to the adjustment of the student especially in the beginning months. Our guidance counselor supports the staff with different strategies to support in class socialization and also different ways to encourage parental involvement. They are also programmed into ENL classes in High School and given the opportunity to chose the best program available. 4.On school-wide PD days the school does focus part of the day on ELL training. Staff is also encouraged to attend outside PD sessions for ELLs.Attendance is taken at every PD session and administrators maintain a binder of participants for all PD sessions. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Paste response to question here: 1 and 2. Our professional learning plan this year addressed the following topics: Reading and Writing content towards ELA Exam: • Close Reading Strategies 9  • Building Academic Vocabulary • Infusing CCLS in lesson planning with comprehension standards • Integrating word finds and visuals in daily lessons Choice Boards Internet Investigations Scaffolding Language: • Engaging students in meaningful work • Learning in group settings • Making meaning explicit with academic language • Differentiated Assessments Adjusted Questions Integrating Language and Subject learning: • Planning curriculum mapping with thematic units • Developing essential Questions Pedagogues have ongoing professional learning sessions every Monday and Tuesdays during OPW time and during common planning time throughout the week, where strategies and instructional methods are discussed and evaluated to suit the needs of our students. Additionally, our ENL teacher attends professional learning sessions offered by our district and NYCDOE throughout the school year. 3.The support staff has is informative and instructional. All teachers receive the latest scores on ATS. The staff has the latest texts on ELL strategies and during their Common Planning Time, they discuss effective instructional strategies to benefit ELLs throughout each unit. Upon entering middle school, students take part in our “Buddy” Program, where they are paired up with a student who is more proficient in English yet shares their native language in an effort to assist in their transition from elementary school. This is a good esteem builder for ELLs in this transitional period. In an effort to assist ELLs in their transition to High School, students are referred to the peer leadership programs that assist with our SAPIS guidance counselor which helps with their socialization skills. Our guidance counselor supports the staff with different strategies to support in class socialization and also different ways to encourage parental involvement. They are also programmed into ENL classes in High School and given the opportunity to chose the best program available. 4.On school-wide PD days the school does focus part of the day on ELL training. Staff is also encouraged to attend outside PD sessions for ELLs. Attendance is taken at every PD session and administrators maintain a binder of participants for all PD sessions. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent-Teacher Conference night happens in our school four times a year. During these afternoon and night sessions, our turn-out rate is very high and we have the opportunity to speak to many parents one on one about the goals of the ELL program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. It is a time for parents to understand and openly discuss their child's progress. There is also an ELL parent orientation when new ELLs arrive in our building, where the ENL teacher meets with the parents to discuss all aspects of the classes and 0  programs the students will be partaking in. Beginning in the upcoming school year, IS 34will be setting up meetings throughout the school year for each individual child. During these meetings, it is required to discuss the progress of the ELL's and provide feedback for the parents as well. For any of these meetings throughout the school year, the parents are entitled to translation services and the administrators will utilize the translations unit provided by the DOE to ensure all parents can communicate with the teachers. Our parent coordinator works with the parents to provide relative information for all ELLs to keep parents involved with what is going on in the child's program. Additionally, we utilize PupilPath, our online gradebook and messaging system, which translates pertinent information for families. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All records for annual individual meetings with ELL parents as well as outreach to ensure parent needs are accommodated are recorded. Every time the ELL teacher reaches out to a parent whether it be by letter or phone call, it is documented or copied to be stored in the ENL teacher's binder. All parents are contacted in the specific language of their choice. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, John Boyle, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) John Boyle Title Principal Ashley Bulko Assistant Principal Diane Cunsolo Parent Coordinator Rosanna Verga ENL/Bilingual Teacher Cindy Yue Parent Teresa Amorelli Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Theresa Russo School Counselor Anthony Lodico Enrico Domingo Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/6/17 9/6/17 9/6/17 9/6/17 9/6/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 9/6/17 1/1/01 9/6/17 9/6/17 9/6/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R034 School Name: Totten Intermediate School Superintendent: - The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Diane Cunsolo Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Each parent is given a language survey when their child registers for school. The survey includes the opportunity for parents/guardians to indicate the language in which they prefer information be given. Written notices are sent home in the indicated languages, appropriate translators are made available for meetings when requested. A school-wide notice is sent home the first school week informing all parents of the availability of translators if needed. IS34.org website allows parents the accessibility to view important notices and events in their native language. School messenger automatically translates messages into the home language. Our pupil accounting secretary refers to the parent/information screen which indicates spoken or written language of parents. Therefore, any documents that are sent out are in the child's appropriate language. The emergency cards indicate the language spoken, therefore this is addressed if the case should arise. 4  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Chinese Cantonese Hindi Luganda Mandarin English Polish Russian Sinhalese Spanish Uzbek 3 13 21 1 1 1 0 1058 1 11 1 53 2 .26 1.12 1.8 0.09 0.09 0.09 0 90.82 0.09 0.94 0.09 4.55 0.17 3 12 15 1 1 1 5 1061 1 11 1 51 2 .26 1.03 1.29 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.43 91.07 0.09 0.94 0.09 4.38 0.17 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families PupilPath Invitation Letters September and as requested Student Handbook Lunch Forms Online September School Event Calendar Ongoing Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The online system translates the letter. The online system translates the document. Forms are given in home language. The online system translates the calendar. 5  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Back to School Night September Parent Teacher Conferences September/November/February/May - - - - Private Interpreter Private Interpreter - - 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School Messenger Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Attend district trainings Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Translated forms sent electronically, PupilPath translated letters, curriculum nights with appropriate interpreters present Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Frequent On-line surveys and face-to-face meetings with out ENL teacher 6  7 
