 31R047 School Name: CSI HIGH SCHOOL FOR INTERNATIONAL STUDIES Principal: JOSEPH CANALE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information College of Staten Island High School 31R047 School Number (DBN): 353100011047 9-12 100 Essex Drive Staten Island NY 10314 718 370 6900 Phone Number: 718 370 6915 Fax: Joseph Canale JCanale2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Joseph Canale Lena Cosentino Helene Bucchieri and Kim Byrne Karolynn Mangiero N/A Adam Goudjil William Danis alternate student Maria Psomas Susan Sullivan District Information Geographical District: 31 Anthony Lodico Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island, NY 10314 Superintendent’s Office Address: ALodico@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5657 Phone Number: 718-420-5667 Fax:   Staten Island FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Kevin Moran Executive Director: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island, NY 10314 Kmoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-556-8367 Phone Number: 718-391-6109 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Joseph Canale Lena Cosentino Kimberly Byrne Adam Goudjil William Danis Student Alternate Maria Psomas Susan Sullivan Karolynn Mangiero Barbara Niederhoffer *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/   Helene Bucchieri Johanney Delacruz Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ parent Member/ parent Member/ parent Member/parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? College of Staten Island High School for International Studies will create a nurturing educational environment in which students are actively engaged and challenged in developing literacy and problem solving skills to succeed in post-secondary education, advanced courses of study and the world of work. At CSI High School students, staff and parents will collaborate to create a vibrant learning community. Students attending CSI High School will participate in rigorous inquiry based instruction and learning that integrates world issues, languages, and cultures. The integration of a   thorough course of study with internationally themed content coupled with community involvement will provide students with the skills and experiences to be responsible and ethical participants in a global society. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. College of Staten Island High School for International Studies (CSIHS) is a premier small public high school on Staten Island in the New Springville neighborhood. CSI High School maintains a rigorous and challenging academic environment dedicated to college readiness for all students. The school leads the Borough and City in many metrics of performance and achievement; reflected in the school’s data and the Framework for Great Schools Quality Guide. Consequently CSIHS is ranked as a leader in the Borough and City comparison as demonstrating “high impact” and “high performance.” CSI High School is a designated “NYC Respect for All School” which reflects a wholesome school tone with high expectations around student conduct, citizenship, and the degree to which students uphold the school values of community, empathy, and pluralism. CSIHS is in contention for the National Blue Ribbon Award by the United States Department of Education after nomination for excellence by the New York State Education Department. CSI High School has also been recognized and ranked among Newsweek’s Rankings of America’s Top High Schools “Beating the Odds.” This prestigious national ranking/recognition identifies schools nationwide that have done an excellent job of preparing their students for college while also overcoming the obstacles posed by students facing economic disadvantages. The inclusion of CSIHS in these rankings bespeaks the great success CSIHS’s reputation has come to be so well known for. In the Fall of 2017 CSI High School was listed as # 25 in The NY Post’s Top 40 NYC High Schools. The school maintains a collaborative partnership with the College of Staten Island/CUNY that enriches the school and provides tailored opportunities that support student achievement and college opportunities while students are in high school. With 502 students from grade 9 through grade 12. The school population comprises 9% African American, 19% Hispanic, 56% White, and 14% Asian students. The student body includes 1% English language learners and 14% special education students. Boys account for 38% of the students enrolled and girls account for 61%. The average attendance rate for the previous school year 94%. CSI HS maintains a collaboration with the College of Staten Island/CUNY and loose affiliation to the Asia Society. The school’s overarching goal is college and career readiness. Special features of the school include: a four year comprehensive advisory program; a three year world language mandate for all students to build global competence and support students as future career seekers in the 21st century economy; robust advanced course/AP/honors offerings to ensure students have rigorous course work, a dynamic and a collaborative campus setting with collaborations among the four schools that share the Jerome Parker Campus, correspondence/online Advanced Placement classes via the distance learning platform, APEX. Some additional unique features the school maintains are joint athletic program in collaboration with Gaynor McCown High School, an annual mandatory interdisciplinary summer research project that all students complete, end of the year student portfolio projects with oral presentations, a comprehensive senior capstone project, and annual school events like International Day, Career Day, and Spirit Week. CSI HS facilitates a summer immersion academy for freshmen, a Big and Little Dragon mentor experience, as well as a Fall ropes course in which ninth grade students learn team work, collaboration, and build community. Freshmen may be given two additional classes of supplementary enrichment Math and English Language Arts before and after the regular school day to support students who encounter challenges in these subjects. CSIHS participates in NYC DOE's Algebra for All and Computer Science for all initiatives. CSI HS annually offers international trips to broaden students’ global competence and to engage in experiential learning abroad through visits and touring of notable exhibits and destinations of significance. All students are required to take three years of foreign language as part of the school's international vision and mission. Students also may undertake AP Spanish. The languages offered are Mandarin Chinese and Spanish. Often 0  international trips are organized around language and cultural immersion. Through our ongoing collaboration with the Palazzo Strossi Foundation, annually students travel and live in Florence, Italy and learn about the Renaissance. CSIHS has traveled to Japan, engaged in a student home stays in exchanges with a school from Barcelona and facilitated school expeditions to Berlin, Prague, Austria, Czech Republic, and Switzerland, Spain and Portugal, and South Africa. Students are also required to complete a minimum 120 hours of community service and 120 hours of internship/service learning. Important scholarship data for graduating seniors has been: 2012-13: $2,313,700.00 2013-14: $4,018,814.00 2014-15: $5,049,522.00 2015-16: $9,600,000.00 2016-17: $9,200,000.00 2017-18: $9,400,000.00 The 2016 4 Year Graduation Rate was 100%. The 2017 4 year Graduation Rate was 99.4% The 2018 4 year Graduation Rate was 100% The School’s College Readiness metric for graduating 12th graders has progressively increased from 55% in 2014 to 88% in 2017. In supporting teachers’ development and growth. The school has provided resources over the years these have included: Aussie coaching for the mathematics department. External science coaching through the network and outside vendor. External physical education coaching through external retired school leadership. Liberally granting professional development requests from teachers. Learning/discussion chips from mentoring minds for student dialogue support. Every teacher has been given Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for Excellence. Teachers have been given CCLS (ELA/Humanities/Science and Technical subjects and Mathematics) flip charts with the standards and helpful resources. Publications on ICT/CTT partnership practices. 1  Differentiation strategy sheet and wheels to help model higher order questions. Flip charts on master instructional strategies have been distributed to teachers. Different departments have been given subject specific education handbooks around questioning. Teachers have been given the book How Children Learn Best by Paul Tough Teachers each given a copy of the Core Six to use as a strategy resource. Resources that teachers request themselves are often procured including technology. The school provides a comprehensive excel data sheet with SAT, student learning style, and Lexile scores. This data is disaggregated by course code data making it user friendly for teachers. At the incoming 9th grade level baseline information is generated around mathematical and ELA skills via baseline testing. The principal conducts monthly Snack and Learns with the staff around methods and avenues for improvement in pedagogy. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The CSI HS student populations reflect the Borough of Staten Island’s demographics. All learners regardless of background or ability are appropriately academically challenged through rigorous instruction that is designed to push the individual student’s thinking and critical analysis skills. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Overall CSI High School outperforms Borough and City averages for every element of the Framework for Great Schools. CSI High School has made the greatest progress with: (1) Rigorous Instruction, where CSIHS outpaced the Borough-wide and City-wide averages and improved from the previous year; (2) Supportive Environment, where CSIHS outpaced the Borough-wide and City-wide averages and improved from the previous year; (3) Strong Family Community Ties where CSIHS outpaced the Borough-wide and City-wide averages and improved from the previous year. Tentative ratings for the year have explained the Principal is highly effective through the Measures of Leadership Practice Review (June 18). While stronger than City and Borough averages, the following areas will be a focus for improvement: (1) Collaborative Teachers while highly effectively rated as an element, this is an area of focus. Noting a slight decline of 0.2% from 2016-17 to 2017-18 work will be taken to attain growth of 0.5%; (2) School Leadership while highly effectively rated as an element, this is an area of focus. Identifying that there was a decline of .43% from 2016-17 to 2017-18 work will be taken to attain growth of 0.5% in this element; the 2017 Quality Guide demonstrates that the rating for Trust while competitive – remains below a score of 4.0 at a 3.94% – thus Trust will again be an area of focus for the school aiming to achieve a score of 4.0%. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R047 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 495 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A 2 6 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 18 10 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 48.0% % Attendance Rate 39.2% % Reduced Lunch 0.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 19.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 56.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 99% 95% 99.2% 44.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES No N/A 127 75 94.9% 9.7% 15.6% 7.9% 14.3% 2.0% 2 6% 4.5 N/A N/A 99% 100% 96.7% 47% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. While school data in the area of rigorous instruction remains very strong up from 2017 school quality data to 4.89 out 5.00; in the area of mathematics we have seen that in both Algebra and Geometry Regents results have seen an up tick in failure. Specifically in Geometry, in the last three years (36% (2018), 36% (2017), and 29% (2016)) the number of failing scores (0-64) on Geometry has been rising. Likewise in Integrated Algebra, we have seen an increase in 2018 of students failing going from 7% to 9% in the 0-64 range. Moreover in Algebra 2, we have seen an increase in students scoring between 0-64 from 22% in 2017 to 27% in 2018. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through an emphasis around free response question strategies, incorporation of Algebra for All/National Teacher Network professional development training and strategy incorporation CSIHS 0-64% failure rates in Integrated Algebra, Geometry, and Algebra 2 will decrease by at least 5% on the 2019 Regents Exam in each discipline. 4 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept. 2018-June 2019 Math Special and General Education Students Math Teachers & Special Ed. Math Teacher, Administration, Grade Teams, associated 1-to 1 paraprofessionals, and parents. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. By November 2018 the Math department will engage in an intensive analysis of the 2018 Regents Exam item analysis tool. 2. From this review and analysis pedagogical strategies and instructional changes will be considered and action ideas slated for implementation. 3. Cross collaboration on the various grade teams will continue to formulate intervention strategies and techniques around teacher pedagogy and social emotional learning to support all learners. 4. The Math Department Impact Team will focus on the application of strategies to increase the number of free response questions students attempt and earn partial credit for. 5. Task design, vetting, and looking at student work (tasks) will be facilitated through grade teams and the teachers will identify patterns and trends and will adjust instruction accordingly incorporating strategies across the grade that raise student achievement and improve the targeted skills of the Instructional Focus. 6. Targeted small group instruction based on data review will be conducted during professional periods. 7. Mock free response questions will be administered under testing conditions and Math teachers will assess and collaborate on the results and next steps across the department. 8. Implementation of Algebra for All/NTN instructional methods for mathematics will be incorporated across the math department. 5 Math Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration, Grade Teams, associated 1-to 1 paraprofessionals, and parents. 10. A mathematics licensed ICT teacher has been installed with content knowledge and with collaborative planning periods embedded into teacher program. 11. Math teachers will attend borough professional developments that support instructional strategies in mathematics. 1. By November, 2018 the Math Department Impact Team will engage in an intensive analysis of Math Regents, answered questions, and analyzed the free response (REDS report) from the 2018 Math Regents exam. 2. From this review and analysis, pedagogical strategies and instructional changes will be slated for implementation. 3. Cross collaboration on the grade impact teams will occur 12 times within the year from September to June on Fridays during professional development time. 4. The Math Department Impact Team will focus on the application of strategies to increase the number of free response questions students attempt and earn partial credit for as well as work to promote student ownership through formative assessment strategies. 5. Task design and looking at student work (tasks) will be facilitated through periodic grade teams meetings and the teachers will identify patterns and trends and will adjust instruction accordingly using strategies to allow multiple entry points for all learners. 6. Targeted small group instruction based on data review of mock Math regents paying special attention to bottom third and at-risk learners will be conducted during professional periods/after school tutoring. 7. Mock free response math regents sections will be administered under testing conditions and Math teachers will assess and collaborate on the results and next steps. 8. Parents/guardians will be apprised of students progress through teacher outreach on Mondays and Tuesdays from 255PM-3:15PM 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will utilize the back to school night in September with parents and guardians following their child’s program and hear how Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core are implemented within each academic subject 6  matter and how the home can support the child. The school leadership and teacher leadership will hold weekend breakfast/luncheon/early dinner meetings targeting specific grade’s families to communicate how Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core impact the particular grade/cohort and the progression of this from the previous year. In the Spring an annual advanced course family information symposium will be held to inform families about advanced placement, honors, and college now opportunities available to them and the specific requirements, content, and expectations around each individual course so that families can understand the rigor of courses and also be strategic and thoughtful as the family meaningfully decides what the best course of action will be in the selection of advanced classes. Finally there will be at least one student-led conference held during the school year which will address the rigorous work the students have worked at in alignment to the Common Core. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time to attend professional developments that will be forthcoming from the District/Borough Field Support Center/teacher chosen professional developments. Time allocated to work in teams/pairs during the day vis-a-vis the uniform teacher common planning period (F Block). This will be facilitated through specific planning with teacher programs. Time allowance for key plus all staff through the 2017-18 School Based Option which created designated teacher team/inquiry work periods on Friday afternoons between 1:35-3:05PM. On November professional development day, time will be allocated for teacher intensive review of Regents/CCLS exams’ results and then strategic planning for improvement in writing/use of evidence based upon results. Similarly across all faculty and staff there will be deep dive into the data of the 2017 teacher Tripod surveys. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mock regents, administration involvement on teacher teams, administration’s participation on grade teams, through observation feedback, administration will specifically reference the improvement of free response questions strategies with evidence as lens of steps for improvement/feedback, school leaders will collect and review gap surfacing templates from exam analysis across all Mathematics June 2018 Regents with strategies toward improvement to teacher practice/signature content pedagogies. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The teachers will utilize student exam/benchmarks at the midpoint of the year to gauge progress of students/student achievement. Administration will utilize observation data, pre-observation, and post-observations to assess the staff's attention to the throughout the year. Teachers will also engage in monthly departmental rounds observing and giving feedback to their peers. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? CSI High School has achieved success in the area of supportive environment.  There is a comprehensive four year advisory program that is aligned to the school's international vision as well as the CCLS, independent reading cycles, and literacy building provisions.  The advisory curriculum underwent a significant revision at the end of 2018 based upon teacher and student feedback - a new curriculum was launched in Fall 2018. The curriculum was revised previously in late Spring 2017 and late Spring 2016..  There is a fully staffed College Office with a full time college counselor as well as the school wide use of Naviance.  Cycles of inquiry are divided by five grade teams (9, 10, 11, 12, and World Language) all aim to develop intervention plans that target improvement for at risk learners including the bottom third students and students that are cross sectional to develop, implement, evaluate, and revise the strategies to advance the grade.  The principal meets monthly with four different advisory councils (one representative from each advisory on each grade level).  The leadership conducts big teaches around school tone twice a year with each grade separated by advisory this is facilitated through the principal.  The principal conducts a safety big teach and reviews with all students by separated grade level the level of cooperation and information students need to understand and exhibit for evacuations, shelter in, soft lock down, hard lock down, and other contingencies around emergency preparedness.  The principal and assistant principal have an open door policy for all students, are present at student arrival in the morning, and most days are present at dismissal and walk to the public transportation hubs with the students. The principal and assistant principal are on the floors during student passing.  There is a supportive club chartering process and annually CSIHS has between 15-30 clubs and student organizations as well as a robust PSAL program, and campus cheer leading squad. Through informal conversations with students the school will build on the previous use of big teaches for example in showing the documentary Screenagers, the Hunting Ground, Ryan's Story which dealt with issues pertinent to a wholesome and safe school tone. This will be done by adding big teaches around student conduct and humane treatment among students by adding big teaches around the documentary “Unslut” and other big teach topics relevant to supporting a strong school tone. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 8  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In the area of Supportive Environment, CSIHS the School has made strong progress over the last several years. Some programs/initiatives that bespeak our success are:  Annually CSIHS hosts each grade for a family breakfast/brunch on Saturdays (Freshman, Sophomore/Junior). Annually the seniors have a family luncheon on a Saturday.  These weekend family events promote collaborations and partnership between school and families.  The PTA hosts a plethora of events that bring faculty and staff together with the parent community these have included Comedy Club Night, Lunar New Year Family Night, the Fashion Show, and parent workshops on various topics of interests based upon survey feedback given to incoming parents at orientation.  The school hosts many events to celebrate students these are held evenings to foster parental involvement and attendance and include the annual Arts Reception and Expose, student concerts, Curriculum Night, Senior Awards Night, Back to School Night, and Student Led Conferences (at least once a year), and the Senior Capstone Project Fair. Six times a year the school does progress report mailings to ensure communication on academic achievement is comprehensive. Implementation of social emotional learning principles will be spiraled in to classes.   Every two to three weeks the administration will have snack and learns facilitated that address social  emotional learning concepts and practice in the classroom. By June 2019, the survey scores in the sub-areas of Social Emotional Learning, specifically the areas of Personal Attention and Support and Academic Press will improve by 2%. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The principal will increase frequency of grade specific student advisory council meetings to monthly instead of every six weeks. At these meetings students from each grade’s individual advisories can address concerns related to their grade for action and attention by the school. The faculty will undertake a comprehensive analysis of the Student Perception and Learning Environment Survey as it relates to personal attention and support and academic press and will develop an best practices/action plan to make improvements in these indicators across the school. The Principal will transmit student concerns from consultative council to staff via electronic newsletter and weekly staff meetings. A routine advisory conferencing procedure will be more systematically integrated in the advisory program. Specifically advisers will be introduced to a conferencing protocol and will be responsible for conferencing at least two students per week during independent reading. An increase in distribution of transcripts students will be facilitated to foster greater awareness of academic achievement and next level guidance. Specifically transcripts will be distributed to every student in September attached to report cards in February and June. Transcript/permanent records will also be distributed to advisers in September for conferencing in advisory which is data specific and more personal in attention and support to advisees. The Transcript Review Time Program will be expanded to promote student ownership and guidance advice around academic rigor and support of student learning goals. The school will facilitate big teaches around attendance and achievement, bullying and violence prevention, character development and life skills, 9 th -12 th grade students September 2018-June 2019 - Last week of each month Principal 9th-12th grade students Full Faculty 9 th -12 th grade students School Leadership/Grade Team Leaders/principal Advisory Teams/Advisory Teachers September 2018 welcome back Professional Development Day, Snack and Learns, and Professional Development Day Workshops September 2018-June 2019 on designated independent reading days in advisory classes 9 th - 12 th grade students June 2018-June 2019 Guidance, Advisers, students, parents, and administration. 9 th -12 th grade students, September 2018-June 2019 E-chalk, students, parents, advisers. 0 college and career readiness, culturally relevant education (CRE) , drug and alcohol prevention, and digital citizenship . The program also includes engaging parent workshop resources and professional development (PD) modules. The school will provide AP course offerings to the school through the APEX platform. The following AP Courses were newly offered to students AP Statistics, AP US Government and Politics, AP Spanish, and AP Psychology. The school will introduce AP Computer Science in alignment with the NYC DOE Equity and Excellence initiative. parents, and teachers/advisors September 4 - full staff training. Parent roll out September 15 (PTA Meeting, September 13 (Freshman Family Breakfast,Sophomore and Junior Family Brunch and Senior Family Luncheon) 11th-12th grade students September 2018-June 2019 APEX, students The school will facilitate Career Day where students will meet with invited guest speaker from all professional backgrounds. Students will attend workshops to learn about different fields and 11th-12th Grade students March 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and guardians will receive information through PTA events, school events, parent workshops, weekend family information sessions, communications from the principal and the parent coordinator via email. Information will be provided via the school’s website and also through school’s phone master. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding for the school sponsored big teaches, time for extra guidance, part of advisory will include the improved conference protocol and additional time allocation monies for guidance during off hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 1  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Also on September 4th, time was carved out for advisory teams by grade as part of professional development so that they could gain familiarity with incorporating new social emotional learning concepts. Teams considered options and practices for incorporating the platform/resources, discussed the new revisions to the advisory curriculum, and reviewed the individual student conferencing protocol and its effective incorporation in to advisory practice. Leadership will also incorporate videos from Connect with Kids into advisory and during big teaches. The administration will during monthly advisory walk-throughs examine the success of the conferencing protocol/use of advisory curriculum, and ensure that when advisory teams meet for their designated meeting times that they compare best practices in these areas. Check-ins with guidance will be scheduled to assess the components associated with STARS, transcripts, and the guidance counselors. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets for the principal-advisory cohort meetings, PD materials and agenda reflecting work around Learning Environment Survey and Tripod Survey, evaluator observations will capture the alignment to school-wide action plan. Family workshops around Connect With Kids Program by February 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. CSI High School has achieved success in the area of Collaborative Teachers as evidenced in performance which outpaces the City and Borough in this element.  Cycles of inquiry are divided by four grade teams (9,10,11, and 12) and a World Language team that aims to  develop intervention plans that target improvement for at risk learners including the bottom third. In 2017-18 CSIHS was bestowed the United Federation of Teachers Team Award in recognition for excellence in education through collaboration and the promotion of a positive school culture.  The school has an active Professional Development Inquiry Steering Team composed of Grade Team Leaders (teachers) that meet weekly and charts the year's professional development opportunities.  The school has a collaborative, carefully-crafted annual SBO that represents a collegial ethos across faculty ranks and school leadership.  The school has an active SLT that is at the forefront of stewardship for the school. Teachers on the team have  always been active contributors and chaired the SLT. Faculty members by department collaborate and in a rotation over the year, facilitate monthly professional development to the full staff about strategies for improvement and pedagogical innovations across content areas with emphasis on the school's instructional focus.  The school through planning and schedule design and maintains a uniform common planning period within the school.  There are a plethora of teaming opportunities On the most recent school quality guide, an area where greater progress is needed is in the arena of Collaborative Teachers, specifically Quality of Professional Development and School Commitment. The achievement measure on Quality of Professional Development was 3.47 out of 4.0 and in School Commitment the measure was 3.89 out of 4.0. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the survey scores in Quality of Professional Development and School Commitment will improve and overall for this element there will be a growth in achievement from 4.50 to 4.75. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  In September 2018 the Grade Team Leaders will conduct a needs assessment internally and then faculty-wide about Professional Development needs. Needs of school-wide goal advancement (formative assessment/student ownership) and individual faculty/staff professional development needs will be ascertained. Teacher distinguished practice inter-visits will be launched with teachers that finished at the Highly Effective range on their MTOP. These inter-visitations will be around areas of need surfaced by the faculty through the needs assessment/expressed interest/leadership's observations. Principal snack and Learn topics will also be grounded in observation data and/or surveyed faculty needs. Department Instructional Rounds will be advanced no longer just focusing on best practices of the Danielson Framework but also based upon teacher goals for the year and practices associated with District 31 priorities around creating assessment capable learners and student ownership/the instructional focus. The leadership will align and work to support faculty members' individual yearly goals to professional development opportunities for staff on an individual basis. The administration/grade team leaders will survey the staff to better meet professional development needs and assess school-wide efforts in November and January (the survey will be designed by the Grade Team Leaders) Closer collaboration between CSIHS's PD needs and the BFSC will be advanced. The staff's PD needs will be advanced by school leadership sharing the needs assessment with key District and Borough Instructional Support teams and leveraging appropriate professional developments. Teacher inter-visitation will continue to expand beyond academic departments to teachers on grade/the grade team. Protocols will be similar to the instructional rounds of the academic departments but will focus on grade team intervention strategies, student ownership, and the application of assessment capable learner strategies through the grade. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Faculty/ Staff Aug.-Sept. 2018 Teacher Grade Team Leaders and School Leaders. Faculty/ Staff Oct.-June 2019 arranged based upon teacher observations Faculty/ Oct.-June Staff 2019 Faculty/Staff Sept.-June 2019 Teacher Grade Team Faculty Members willing to share a highly effective practice and conduct a workshop for peers. Grade Team Leaders, Academic Departments and Faculty. Leadership, Teacher Grade Team Leaders and communicative staff Faculty/ Staff Oct.-June 2019 Leadership, BFSC, and District Personnel. Faculty Oct.-June 2019 Grade Teams 4 An administrative intern will provide a needs assessment and the tailor a bi-weekly snack and learn for faculty and staff Faculty Sept.-June 2019 administrative intern The 9th grade team will visit intermediate 8th grade ICT classrooms and reciprocally the 8th grade teachers will visit the 9th grade ICT classes. 9th Grade Faculty Oct-June 2019 9th Grade Team, leadership and teachers of feeder middle schools. As part of the school's Algebra for All participation, National Teacher Network personnel will be utilized to coach and provide professional development to math teachers. Math Faculty Oct.-June Robyn Posner/NTN 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will continue using a more extensive online grading platform that supports families and students to a greater extent than previously possible with Engrade. Also the grade team work, inter-visitation/instructional rounds connecting to student ownership the school instructional focus will be explained during weekend parent workshops and in communications to families so the home understand the basis for the visiting teachers and the overarching goal of faculty members to building greater capacity of student ownership and assessment capable learners within the student body. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session funding for Grade Team Leaders, funds for paid prep. periods for instructional rounds, and leveraging of borough/district programs to support CSIHS professional development needs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The school will monitor progress using survey content and format generated and administered by the Grade Team Leaders in September 2018. Development of a plan to incorporate tailored professional development into the school-wide professional development plan. Examining Borough/District PD offerings and aligning to needs expressed by the faculty in their goal sheets will be monitored in an on going through year with a cumulative analysis in Feb. 2019. A schedule of distinguished teacher inter-visitations opportunities will be ongoing. The progress will be assessed on November 2018 and February 2019 via assessment designed by the Grade Team Leaders and February goal check in. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets, survey, survey results, schedule of instructional rounds, and feedback form logs. 5  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. CSI High School has achieved success in the area of Effective School Leadership as evidenced in performance which outpaces the City and Borough in this element.. On the 2018 School Quality Guide, the following are areas of celebration -indicating percent of positive response: Teacher Influence 89% Program Coherence 95% Instructional Leadership 97% Inclusive Leadership 94% On the Framework for Great Schools 2018 Report, an area where greater progress is needed is in the arena of Teacher Influence as this was the only areas where 90% positive response was not achieved. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the survey scores in Teacher Influence will improve from 89% to 92%. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The principal/leadership will continue to act as a committee member of the Grade Team Leaders /Professional Development steering committee which will meet at least bi-monthly. Staff Monthly 2018-2019 principal/assistant principal/ grade team leaders. The principal and assistant principal will continue to serve on the MOSL committee and work in a collaborative fashion with faculty members on school level MOSL decisions. staff Monthly In advance of monthly School Leadership Team meetings the principal will solicit input from the faculty and communicate to the SLT on behalf of parents' feedback. staff principal/assistant principal/grade team leaders. principal/staff/SLT 2018-2019 Monthly 2018-2019 The principal will solicit proposals from the faculty to improve the collaboration with the College of Staten Island staff Oct. 2018 principal/teachers/CSI/ The leadership will continue the practice of allowing teachers to become part of the hiring decisions as part of a panel to fill vacancies. staff As needed CUNY leadership and teachers The principal and assistant principal will continue Snack and Learns, Chat and Chews, and have an open door policy for staff and students. staff Monthly 2018-19 principal/assistant principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The principal will send out a quarterly parent newsletter informing parents around faculty/school initiatives. Parents will also be invited to observe instruction by teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding for weekend breakfast/brunch and per session funds for staff that will present to families during weekend events. 8  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The school will monitor progress on a monthly basis - through input collected and presented at monthly SLT meetings as well as sign in sheets for PTA meetings and weekend family meetings. The administration will solicit teacher feedback monthly on school affairs. This goal will be assessed by taking a cumulative examination of all data at the end of the Fall Semester in February 2019 by the Grade Team Leaders and adjustments made accordingly. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets, feedback to surveys, soft data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the Framework for Great Schools 2018 Report the area of Strong Family Community Ties so an increase from 4.15 to 4.17. However the measures on Parent Involvement section of the School Quality Guide indicated that 69% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. While overall progress improved, the area of parent involvement in the school is only 81%. Family and community partnerships are an area that CSIHS values as critical ingredient to our school’s success. To that end partnership between the school, students’ homes, and the community are incredibly valued. Among the avenues the school has taken are at the start of the year weekend breakfast meetings are organized where information by grade is prepared with various presentations for families (students and their parents) based on 9th, 10th, 11th, or 12th grade. Topics at all meetings deal with the college readiness, the school’s electronic grade book system training, the school website, the weekly parent e-letter, the rigors of the standards, the school’s instructional focus, school-wide Lexile scores by grade and ways that families can be supported, college and career readiness, regents scores and correlation to college remediation. The school also holds a simulated school night/curriculum night each September and has been doing so every year since inception to instill a sense of partnership between school and home. Other ways that the school communicates high expectations with families is in having Family Regents Exam Information Nights to share ways for families to be aware of key strategies that students should be working on for levels of high achievement on state exams. In cases where students are struggling, often meetings are hosted where the entire set of the child’s teachers will collaborate on the difficulties the student is having and help develop action plan/guidance interventions with the parent and school leadership. After marking period grades are released the school contacts parents for students that failed one or more classes in a personal message in the Principal's voice with suggestions and next steps on turning progress around. Honor roll messages for Summa Cum Laude and Magna Cum Laude (two classes of honor roll) are also recorded in the Principal's voice celebrating the students’ scholarship and academic achievement with marking period grades. To support academic reflection and student ownership of learning and collaboration with families, CSIHS hosts student led conferences twice a year at the second marking period conclusion. During the conferences the students bring parents into evidence based conversations where students present their artifacts on their progress for the marking period and reflect on successes and areas for growth and alignment to report card grades. The school celebrates academic achievement in collaboration with families through the evening National Honor Society Induction Ceremony and through the evening Junior Rite of Passage Ceremony which celebrates successes from 9th-11th grade and symbolically welcomes 11th graders at the end of their year to the status of the graduating class. CSIHS also celebrates the achievement of our AP Studio Art Students comprehensive portfolios and our Drum Circle Facilitators works at an annual evening Arts Reception in which the Art students showcase their works in a gallery setting and the Music students perform pieces for guests. Beyond CSIHS the freshman advisory classes engage in the Giving Project where they learn an international folktale and develop a teachable lesson for students in grades 1-3 and then they travel to a borough elementary school and teach the lesson – thereby spreading global competence throughout Staten Island. Through our music program CSIHS hosts community drum circles for the school and external community where participants learn leadership and followership skills. At the 11th and 12th grade levels all Juniors and Seniors participate in Career Day where the school becomes a series of concurrent career-oriented symposia. This year for example we hosted Borough President James Oddo who spoke to students about careers and during the plenary session gave the students pointers and shared ways to 0  persevere in making professional dreams come true. Thereafter the students through selections they made proceeded to four different breakout sessions to speak to professionals from all careers, industries, and professions. At the senior level, again through advisory, 12th grade students work together and through their senior capstone project identify a problem with a global implication and then develop a strategic action plan and put it into effect to work toward a solution at the community level. This past year has the CSIHS PTA coordinated a borough-wide Girls Empowerment conference that was open Island-wide and featured women at the highest levels of their professions speaking to girls from CSIHSIS and all over Staten Island about no ceilings, no boundaries, and not letting gender be an obstacle to success. Students in grades 9-11 through advisory also work to spread global competence through our school’s annual International Day. During International Day each advisory is assigned a country and the students then research and design an interactive display and transform each classroom to become a different country. Then the students play ambassador as students from area elementary schools visit and receive passports and a travel itinerary and see presentations and exhibits prepared by the different advisories in different classrooms. CSIHSIS also has hosted a college fair (with representation from colleges, professional schools, trade schools, and the armed services) in collaboration with McCown High School for students of our school which is open to students from all over Staten Island. Through the College Office every family is invited to have at least one face to face meeting with the college counselor and their child for assistance with the college selection process. The Office also maintains a college corner on the school website that has ample resources for families. The admissions process also features prominently at the 11th and 12th grade breakfasts. Evening events for parents/families are held annually about college admissions, VESID/ACCESS, financial aid, and admissions at CUNY. CSIHSIS also hosts Advanced Course Information evening to encourage students and families to take advantage of opportunities for advanced courses and make thoughtful choices. Courses such as those offered (honors: Journalism, Pre-Calculus, Physics, and Chemistry; AP: English Composition, English Literature, Studio Art, Biology, Calculus, US History, and Comparative Politics, Computer Science, and College Now) directly impact the college admission process. During Advanced Course Night all the teachers present their syllabi explain the nature of their courses and why the course might be desirable or not desirable for a student. Through the school’s plan and organization, to ensure that all learners are supported and cultivate partnerships with our families, written school progress reports are mailed for at-risk/celebratory purposes six times annually in advance of marking period report cards through the mail. To support parents and keep them informed, the Parent Coordinator sends an e-newsletter weekly with important updates and information. Likewise the school website is utilized as a hub of information and platform for school celebration for parents, students, and the community. The school leadership is also a constant presence at PTA meetings and does deliver reports to parents each month as well as facilitate workshops on various topics including transcripts and graduation requirements. Moreover the school maintains the Engrade Pro online grading application which fosters academic progress to parents and provides an avenue of communication on academic matters between home and school (teachers). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018 the survey scores in Strong Family Community Ties, specifically the areas of Parent Involvement will improve by 2%. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). CSIHS will participate with the College of Staten Island School of Education's Collaborative Committee on Community Partnerships. A parent interest survey/needs assessment will be administered to all incoming 9 th grade students’ parents to try to align a calendar of events for parents within the school to support, inform, and assist parents based upon their needs. Feedback from 10-12 grade families will be solicited by the Parent Coordinator in the Summer of 2016 A family initiative will be launched in 2016-2017 this will be in different areas and will feature faculty facilitation or school partnership with experts. This will be a monthly student and parent offering that will be aimed at helping families learn more about topics of interest and concern to high school age parents. Efforts will also seek to bring in supplements on self-defense, nutrition, and other health related topics Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students depending on varying needs 9-12th Grade Parents November 2018 and February 2019 June 2018-October 2018 Principal, College of Staten Island/CUNY, various community based organizations. Parent Coordinator, Administration, PTA All students and all parents 3rd Week of every month September 2018-June 2019 PE instructor and administration Through the PTA monthly workshops will be offered for families on various topics including academics, CCLS, drug abuse, social media, and other topics of importance to the parent community. All families Building off of the Family Fit Program from 15-16 the school will try to offer fitness-based initiatives for families. All families Second or Third Thursday September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 PTA Officers Administration and relevant instructional staff. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Supporting the school in family and community engagement is the College of Staten Island, PSAL, the Jerome Parker Campus Council, and various organizations the school deals with on an ad-hoc basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Surveys/needs assessments were created and administered during existing 9 th grade orientation. PTA attendance data on event participation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A member of the administration will attend the CSIHS parent initiatives and also PTA workshops. Mid-year in February 2019 parents/families will be solicited via a survey about the offerings and degree to which they find these initiatives beneficial and what if anything can be improved upon. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance rosters and attendance rate at these events will be gauge as well as solicited e-feedback to families on what families would like to see more involvement on. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Baselines Exams Baseline Exams and Teacher Feedback Science Teacher Feedback Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Special Enrichment Classes for struggling 9th grade students In the 9th grade enrichment classes for struggling students Make up Labs/Tutoring Social Studies Teacher Feedback Tutoring At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Transcript Review/Scholarship reports/IEPs. Mentoring, group counseling, one on one counseling, Transcript Tuesdays. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 2 day after school module 2 days after school per week 2 before school module 2 days before school per week Lunch time, before school, and after school tutoring/lab make up Lunch time tutoring assistance by appointment Small group or one to one meetings as scheduled 4 days per week 3 days per week 5 days per week 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. CSIHS does not have students living in temporary housing at this time. 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 7  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 8  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  9   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. CSI High School for International Studies, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students CSI High School for International Studies will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 1  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA//State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) CSI High School for International Studies, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 3  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 4  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 5  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 6  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Staten Island District 31 School Name CSI High School for International Studie School Number 047 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Joseph Canale Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Joseph Errichiello (McCown HS) Teacher/Subject Area Karolynn Mangiero/SS Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Kim Demarzo Superintendent Anthony Lodico (2017-18) Assistant Principal Lauren Torres Coach N/A School Counselor Erika O'Grady Parent Michele Magrone Parent Coordinator Annette Lentini Field Support Center Staff Member Nilda Kraft Other (Name and Title) Vincenza Gallassio, Superinten C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 504 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 4 0 3 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.60% 8  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use Gates MacGinitie diagnostic exams to assess literacy of all students. Currently, 2 of our 3 ELL students are reading 5-7 years below grade level according to this diagnostic rendering a lexile result that requires remediation. As part of our school's instructional plan, we have enlisted students in a literacy enrichment lab which meets after school two days a week. This is in conjunction with ESL classes/units which are grounded in literacy. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 9  Our greatest indicator is that of the NYSESLAT exam. We also use results from Regents exams and lexile scores (reading levels) to evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Patterns show that ELLs have been stagnant over the past two years as per an analysis of the NYSESLAT data. We have never addministered the NYSITELL so we are unable to garner patterns. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 31R047 will implement the CR 154 units of study by dedicating a period per day, taught by a certified ESL teacher, towards ESL instruction. Students are groups by mixed proficiency levels and differentiation occurs within the classroom. Students receive a total of 250 minutes of ESL and ELA instruction per week by a certified ESL teacher at McCown HS. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are programmed for 1 50 minute period per day of ESL/ENL instruction. We currently exceed CR154 units of study and staffing requirements. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 0  The testing cooordinator has a list of ELL students (currently 3) and provides approprite testing accomodations. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for all of the above groups based on various forms of assessment such as NYSESLAT, Regents, Gates Macginitie baseline assessments, interest surveys, readiness levels, and informal/formative assessments. This is often in the form of flexible groupings and the plan for ELLs is that they will be able to function on grade level when in groups and when working on tasks alone. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Some of the strategies specific to ELLs include repetition, graphic organizers, visuals, modified assessments, tailored student activities that consider Multiple Intelligence data and Frayer Model for vocabulary development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All students receive special education services in accordance with the requirements of their IEPs. All students were administered a biligual evaluation mandating intensified processing services as opposed to ESL. Content area teachers are provided with copies of the IEPs so that they may become familiar with the special needs of this student who may have been programmed in their classrooms. Classroom are structured with two licensed teahers in an effort to provide target support around langauge acquistion, learning targets, and individualized education plans. Students are placed in ICT settings with ESL supports We have programmed students for content area instruction as well as targeted support in the Learning Support class and ESL. ELL students with IEPs recieve testing accomodations and language support 2 days a week (curriculum based on ESL standards) All classes have teachers who are highly qualified and who utilize ESL methodologies. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school offers tutoring every day after school along with intervention supports during lunch time in certain subject areas. As high states exams come near, Saturday Academy programs are offered to all students- especially ELLS. This year we implemented a targeted "math lab" and "writing lab"for students at risk. Identification was based on a summer baseline assessment that was administered. Our 9th grade ELL student is currently enrolled in both programs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the upcoming school year, we would like to extend our course offerings in an effort to minimize the amount of students in a class. This will better support all learners, allowing for targeted attention to ELL students 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not plan on discontinuing any services for the upcoming school year. Our math/writing labs are contingent upon funding and teacher program allowances. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Services after school are open to all students regardless of status. School programs are offered to all students as well. See question #10 for supplemental after school programs 1  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our texts are offered in differentiated form and every classroom is equipped with a smartboard for facilitation of visuals and student interaction. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? When necessary, it would be delivered through texts, assessments and materials provided to students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our texts are offered in differentiated form and every classroom is equipped with a smartboard for facilitation of visuals and student interaction. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). As a transition service, students are invited to participate in Freshman Summer Academy (3 weeks) prior to the beginning of the school year. ELLS who enroll throughout the school year have access to our guidance counselor, college counselor, parent coordinator and advisor. Newly enrolled ELLs, depending on need, may be eligible for a supplemental Learning Support class along with ESL supports. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs are afforded the same language electives as all students: Spanish, Mandarin Chinese, Japanese 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At the College of Staten Island HS, development for teachers, administrators, guidance counselors, special educators, psychologists, paraprofessionals and related service providers is provided by the administrative staff, an outside QTEL trained pedagogue as well as internal pedagogical staff Within the school, professional development concentrates on: • The literacy needs of the ESL students. • Scaffolding instruction in Math and Science through experiments and the use of manipulatives. • Sessions on sharing of online resources that can make instruction more effective. 2  • Differentiation of instruction as a general rule but more especially with ELLs. • Q-TEL • Item analysis and use of data gained from Gates MacGinitie and prior NYSESLAT to inform instruction. - Writing strategies that target our bottom third population ELL teachers and content area teachers spend 90 minutes per week dissecting and bridging the CCLS to meet the needs of the grade bands. Teachers servicing ELLS meet with content area teacher 1 period per day to plan, differentiate and find entry points for ELL students. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Supports for ELLs transitioning from Middle School: - 2 periods per week of Math lab for targeted instruction- scaffolded curriculum based on 8th grade scores/standards - 1 period per day of "Learning Support" for students with disabilities and ELLs See question #1. Records are kept by administration. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? This occurs on Mondays and Tuesdays during the designated "Parent Outreach" time. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental involvement workshops held a minimum of 10 times a year with dicsussions around transcript review, promotion and graduation requirements, etc. These workshops include parents of ELLs and a needs assessment is disseminated at the beginning of the year for all parents. - PTA meetings once a month with outreach to parents of ELLs - Parent volunteers are encouraged to spend time and assist in school. - Weekly newsletter to parents generated by our parent coordinator - Monthly newsletters generated by our PTA - Open invitation to all parents to our monthly School Leadership Meetings - Constant communication with families through phone calls from teachers and phone master, emails and the use of an on-line grading system (Engrade) - Data from the Learning Environment Survey helps the school identify needs of parents - School wide activities to include parents in school community- ex. Freshman/sophomore/ junior and senior Luncheons, Dessert Social, College Night, NHS, Open school week, Simulated school night, student led conferences, Junior Rite of passage - Translation of school notices available upon request and all PD opportinities are maintained on file - Translation options on our website Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: Currently our ELL population is being serviced at McCown HS under a lisenced ESL teacher. Our three ELL students are allotted a period a day for ELL instruction (250 minutes per week). Although we do not currently have a licensed ESOL 3  teacher working on staff, we have been able to pool resources with our campus neighboring school to fulfill the requirement under CR Part 154. 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Joseph Canale, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R047 School Name: CSI High School for Int Studies Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At the beginning of every school year, we send out the language preference survey which asks parents to identify a language in which they would like to receive written and oral communication from the school. We also analyze blue cards (Emergency Contact Cards) which are distributed at Freshman Orientation (late June). Based on that data, we secure translators (either from our school community or from translation and interpretation unit) for events that involve such parents. Written communication from the school and/or parent coordinator provide options for varied languages as indicated on this survey. These surveys are kept on file and families that indicate languages other than English are documented and disseminated to staff. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 7 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Across the school, the following preferences surfaced within grade levels: - 9 th Grade: 1 parent prefers written and oral communication in Spanish; 1 parent prefers written communication in Arabic - 10 th grade: 2 parents prefer written and oral communication in Spanish; 1 parent prefers only written communication in Spanish - 11 th Grade:2 parents prefer written and oral communication in Russian; 2 parents prefer written and oral communication in Chinese - 12 th Grade:1 parents prefers written and oral communication in Chinese; 3 parents prefer written and oral communication in Russian; 4 parents prefer written and oral communication in Spanish 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 8  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our website has a translation option made available to families where 80 different languages are accessible. On our website, parent communication, handbooks and DOE memos are mae available on this site and the parent newsletter, which is distributed by our Parent Coordinator, has translation options made available as well. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? There is parent outreach made to parents (via email and phone) by teachers and paraprofessionals every Monday and Tuesday (2:55-3:15). Furthermore, parent meetings in the form of PTA and Parent Teacher Conferences (PTC) are scheduled as follows: 1) 9/17: PTA Meeting 2) 9/30: Curriulum Night 3)10/3: Freshmen Family Breakfast 4) 10/8: PTA 5) 10/17: Sohomore/Junior Family Breakfast; Senior Lunch 6) 10/20 and 10/26: Open House 7)11/5: ACCESS-VR family Meeting 8) 11/12: PTA 9) 11/19 and 11/20: PTC 10)12/3: Financial Aid Night 9  11) 12/10: PTA 12) 1/12: ELA Night 13) 1/14: PTA 14) 2/11: PTA 15)3/3: PTA 16) 3/10 and 3/11: PTC 17) 4/14: PTA 18)5/12: PTA 19) 6/2: PTA 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Welcome poster and the Language ID Guide are located at our main desk and main office. The Parents' Bill of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access is in our main office and Parent Coordinator's Office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 0  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We constantly monitor the quality and avalability of services through parent surveys and informal conversations with parents at events. We also use the Learning Environment Survey (DOE survey) to garner important information about parents' perceptions and levels of satisfaction with our learning environment. 1 
