 31R050 School Name: P.S. 050 FRANK HANKINSON Principal: JOSEPH SANTELLO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Frank Hankinson 353100010050 Pre-k through Fifth Grade School Number (DBN): 31R050 200 Adelaide Avenue Staten Island NY 10306 718-987-0396 718-987-1925 Fax: JMiller13@schools.nyc.gov Janet Miller JosephSantello Email Address: Phone Number: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Dolores Kranpost Judith Mason Dolores Kranpost N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 31 VincenzaGallasio Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace Staten Island, NY 10301 Superintendent’s Office Address: vgallas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5677 Phone Number: 718-420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: 94 Executive Director: 715 Ocean Terrace Staten Island, NY 10301 Executive Director’s Office Address: @schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-556-8367 Phone Number: 718-556-8375 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Joseph Santello Dolores Kranpost Judith Mason N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Jill Sullivan Ivy Zeiger Eileen Shaw *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher (Chairperson) Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) LeenaAbuZahrieh Amy Crane Jennifer Cukoviq Crystal Migliorisi Kim Schwartz Lisa Pizzuto Lauren Brancato Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? P.S. 50 MISSION STATEMENT Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of P.S. 50 is to continue to develop reflective, empowered learners who possess the knowledge, skills, and growth mindset to contribute to our school community and the world beyond. Through the collaborative efforts of the students, families, and staff members they will develop a strong sense of ownership of their learning and will be accountable to themselves and others. They will promote equity, excellence, and empathy in all they do.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 50 is committed to developing well -rounded students. As a result we include the arts, which consists of a visual arts program, chorus, band, recorders, and key-boarding. We are one of two schools on Staten Island that has a partnership with the New York Philharmonic. The school also offers latchkey and after-school programs such as sports, chess and arts and crafts/cooking. These programs were designed in efforts to foster the social/emotional growth of our students with the expectations that they will build confidence and self-esteem, while providing the potential to tap into talents that have not been discovered. As a result, we feel strongly that this approach has had a positive impact on the culture of the building as it has boosted morale, which has stabilized and improved attendance rates. Our Community and Demographics P.S. 50 is located in Oakwood which is a neighborhood located in east central Staten Island. Our school lies near the southern shore and we are in walking distance of the Gateway National Recreation Area, which is also known as Great Kills Park. Our school is encompasses over 724 students. 47% are male and 52% are female. Presently our Hispanic population is 17% while our Asian population totals 16%. There are 2% African American, 63% Caucasian and 2% Multi-Racial students at P.S. 50. At this time we have about a 5% ELL population and 17% of students our students are part of Special Education. Supportive Environment The school offers an array of instructional programs to best meet the needs of our P.S. 50 students. Currently we offer Pre-Kindergarten, Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT,) General Education, Gifted and Talented (grades K-5), as well as Related Services : Speech, Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, and Counseling. We also have “Exposure through the Arts” and developed a Response to Intervention program for grades 3-5 which is provided on Saturdays. This program concentrates on Math and ELA for our Tier 2 and Tier 3 students, to aid in improving academic performance. Teacher Collaboration Over the years many of our staff members have built strong relationships with our students and their parents which fostered a family orientated environment. The teachers designed projects to strengthen our school and provide our parents with academic support. Teacher teams collaborate to draft a monthly newsletter informing parents about the specific topics and content that will be focused on in the subject areas. Teachers have engaged in a project where they developed a series of instructional videos called “Show Me” for parents in an effort to assist them in understanding our GO MATH program. Videos have been posted on the school’s website, www.ps50si.org , which are easily accessible for parents and students. In the past, parents had to attend the schools workshops, which did not offer flexibility or provide instruction when needed. Strong Family – Community Ties The school also places a priority on parent engagement. The Parent's Association (PA) plays an important role in the school’s success. In order to provide a safe environment, parents volunteer to assist with arrival by participating in the 0  school’s Stop and Drop program in the morning. The PA also conducts various fundraisers and has been responsible for furnishing the building with air conditioners and smart boards over the course of several years. With the use of technology, the Remind App and our School Website help to keep parents informed about everything going on within the school. Parent representatives have voiced their concerns and opinions at School Leadership Team meetings. Parent SLT members have been responsible for analyzing, developing, and promoting parent participation in the Learning Environment surveys. Additionally, SLT Parent Members have assisted in the developing of CEP Goals, including the most recent campaign to design a new school logo. Parents receive monthly newsletters geared for their child’s specific grade, they were also invited to a 45 minute parent outreach meeting with their child’s teachers. These offerings allowed parents to an inside view of what happens during the school day. Furthermore, parents obtained an understanding of teaching techniques and ways to reinforce these techniques at home. Rigorous Instruction The 2018-2019 Theory of Action/Instructional Focus has been changed and updated to continue growth: "If Instructional and Impact Team members work together to use and understand tools that clearly establish criteria for success on a continuum that includes models and exemplars... Then students will be empowered to engage in meaningful self-assessment practices by taking an active role in evaluating, planning, monitoring, their personal progress against a standards by creating accurate goals, independently, in efforts to become assessment capable learners." Teachers focus on Danielson's Framework for Teaching when planning; focusing on 1a Demonstrate Knowledge of Content and Pedagogy, 1b Knowledge of Students, 1c Setting Instructional Outcomes, 1d Demonstrating Knowledge of Resources, 1e Designing Coherent Instruction, 1f Designing Student Assessments, 3a Communicating with Students, 3b Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques, 3c Engaging Students in Learning, 3d Using Assessment in Instruction, 3e Demonstrating Flexibility and Responsiveness. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The Special Populations in our school are our ELL population which total 37 children from various ethnicities speaking several different languages. There specific needs are to learn, speak, comprehend, read and write in the English language. These students are pulled out to receive support through our ELL Teacher. We also have 31 Commanding ELL's (former ELL's), those are the students who have scored out in the past two years. They are serviced in their classrooms by the classroom teacher and are provided with small group differentiated work. Another Special Population is our Gifted and Talented students. There is one class on each grade from K-5. The classroom teachers are certified and trained to address the concerns of these students, differentiating between the various modalities of their learning styles. The specific needs of this population varies between student to student, grade to grade, and class to class. We have noticed that this population though very varied in their interests, most seem to enjoy engaging in accountable talk via Socratic Seminars where they are stimulated to perform to their highest potential in ELA and Math. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The area in which we made the most progress over the past year, under the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, would be Rigorous Instruction. Teachers worked together to create lessons and tasks to go along with the Writing Progressions that were developed in the previous year. We felt that it was important for the teachers to dive deep into the instruction, pushing students to peer and self-assess using the progressions. The teachers created micro-teaching videos which they used during their inquiry team meetings to further enhance ways that they can provide appropriate lessons to help students succeed. These videos also became wonderful visual models for students 1  to observe what quality peer/self-assessment looks like. Students were able to develop their writing further because of it. Because the quality of instruction has improved in writing, as well as students' understanding of what writing on their grade should look like, for this school year we have decided to focus on developing Math Progressions. We have decided to make this the focus because we felt that the students would be able to have an entry point to already know how to assess their work along a progression. Under the Framework for Great schools, our teachers will be focusing on working collaboratively to develop math progressions, using the math practice standards simultaneously with the content that is addressed on their grades. Teachers will engage in inter-visitations, lesson planning, Micro-teaching small conference videos, and analyzing student work during Data Inquiry Team Cycles. All of this will result in a vertically aligned building. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R050 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 774 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 54 54 31 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 16 14 31 31 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 40.0% % Attendance Rate 33.7% % Reduced Lunch 4.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 15.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 67.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.66 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 76.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 97% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 108 107 31 94.1% 6.1% 18.2% 2.2% 12.4% 2.2% 4 0% 7.8 78.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the NYS Common Core 2018 mathematics scores, we have found that there is a need to target our Hispanic or Latino populations, as well as our Black or African American populations. We consider these two subgroups to be at risk, because after looking at the disaggregated data, we have concluded that both subgroups are not consistently meeting the state standards at levels 3 and 4 in mathematics. Our Black or African American subgroup in grades 3-5 scored 33% in levels 1 and 2 in 2017; and in 2018 this subgroup scored 50% in levels 1 and 2. Our Hispanic or Latino subgroup in grades 3-5 scored 38% in levels 1 and 2 in 2017; and in 2018 this subgroup scored 35% in levels 1 and 2. We will be able to address this need to target our at risk student subgroups in our building through the Framework on Rigorous Instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our annual goal by June 26, 2019, as a result of all teachers implementing targeted instructional strategies, aligned to the school's professional development, 85% of Black or African American students, and Hispanic or Latino students, will achieve a proficiency level of 3 or 4 in mathematics, as measured by the NYS 2019 Math exam. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Revise math curriculum to provide identified students opportunities to work on separate differentiated tasks and small group mini-lessons. Teachers, students, and Administration Provide support for teacher teams by allocating time for teachers to look at targeted student work, analyze data, and identifying areas of concern. In order to meet goals, lead teachers will use the EAA protocol (Evidence, Analysis, Action) to ensure that all subgroups are being addressed. Teachers, students, and Administration Teacher Teams, Administrators Teacher Teams, Administrators Every 6 weeks starting Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Weekly starting Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Targeted at risk students that were identified within the subgroups will be invited to be a part of our RTI pull-out program. Targeted at risk students that were identified within the subgroups will be invited into attend our AIS program. Teachers, students, and Administration Teachers, Teams, Students, and Administration Weekly from Sept. 5, 2018-May 3, 2019 Weekly starting Sept. 5, 2018- June 26, 2019 RTI Teachers, Classroom Teachers, Administrators AIS Teachers, Classroom Teachers, Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage all at risk students' families through workshops during Parent Association meetings, with the support of members of the Parents Association, Administration and Lead Teachers. We will also provide family support through monthly grade newsletters which are written by teacher teams and supervised by each lead teacher on every grade. Our school website through our Administration will post video's and links to help parents with strategies that they can do at home for their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 5  Teachers will designate time on Monday’s and Tuesday’s after dismissal to work with their grades. Go Math Program Online Engage New York materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31st, 2019, as a result of all teachers' implementing targeted instructional strategies, 65% of Black or African Americans and Hispanic or Latinos will achieve a proficiency level 3 or 4, as measured by the "Go Math" Middle of the Year Exam. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) CCLS aligned benchmark "Go Math" Middle of the Year Exam Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? After analyzing our data from the 2018 State exams, we have found that our at risk subgroups, Black or African Americans, and Hispanic or Latino students, may not be performing to their highest potential. We realized while analyzing the data that we need to target these subgroups to ensure that they are coming to school everyday and on time. In classrooms, teacher may not be making the most of ELA and Social Studies connections with these students through read alouds that they can culturally identify with, and models of people/citizens who have persevered. As noted in section 5A-Rigorous Instruction, many of these students are not meeting the standards in mathematics. We have also analyzed the 2018 ELA data, and found that in grades 3-5 50% of Black or African American students tested were not meeting the state standards and 32% of Hispanic or Latino students were not meeting the state standards. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our annual goal by June 26, 2019, as a result of all teacher's implementing , culturally identifiable curriculum to address targeted subgroups, 85% of Black or African American students and Hispanic or Latino students will achieve a proficiency level of 3 or 4, in ELA as measured by the NYS 2019 ELA exam. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Impact team will meet monthly to implement successful strategies that will be used building wide. The team will identify what the needs for the at risk students, and how they can lead their teacher teams to help at risk students achieve their goals. Teachers, Students, Administration Grade level teams will meet weekly. Together teams will revise curriculum maps, to make them more culturally identifiable through texts selected for read alouds, shared reading, and social studies content. Texts may present cultural experiences, and biographical figures who show character traits such as persistence. Pre-K - Grade 5 Teacher teams will create monthly newsletters highlighting upcoming texts in ELA and Social Studies, to inform families and bridge the gap on cultural background and experiences. Teachers, Parents Instructional Team, Administration, Teachers Grade Teams Classroom Teachers First Monday of each month, September 17th, 2018-June 10th, 2019 Weekly starting Sept. 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Monthly Sept 5, 2018 - June 26, 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to engage families and support their understanding of a Supportive Environment, members from the Instructional Impact Team will engage parents during an SLT meeting, instructing parents on how the school is increasing their use of more culturally diverse material in their ELA and Social Studies curriculum, to address the needs of the targeted students.. By January 2019, parents and students will participate in a survey indicating whether their child has been exposed to instruction that is culturally inclusive of different demographic populations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8  SLT Meeting Common Planning Time on Grades weekly Instructional Impact Team Monthly Meeting on Mondays Grade Level Impact Team Meetings weekly Mondays/Tuesdays Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As a result of all teachers' implementing a more culturally inclusive curriculum , 70% of Black or African Americans and Hispanic or Latinos will achieve a proficiency at a level 3 or 4, as measured by the "Ready ELA" Middle of the Year Exam.By January 31st, 2019, Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The NYS CCSS Ready ELA test will be used as the measurement of progress for our mid-point benchmark. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Under the Framework element Collaborative Teachers, we noticed that 100% of teachers surveyed in the 2018 School Environment Survey, found that they receive support around how to incorporate students' cultural and linguistic backgrounds in their practice. 100% of teachers surveyed say that they adapt instruction to ensure it represents all cultures and backgrounds positively. 100% of teachers surveyed say that they apply their knowledge of parents' various cultural backgrounds when collaborating with them regarding their child's educational progress. Looking deeply at our 2018 State exams disaggregated data, we found our Black or African American, and our Hispanic or Latino subgroups were not making adequate progress toward proficiency levels on the NYS exams from 2017 to 2018. Our Black or African American students in grades 3-5 scoring in levels 1 or 2 in Mathematics for 2017 were 33%; and in 2018 went up to 50%. Our Hispanics or Latino students in grades 3-5 scoring in levels 1 or 2 in Mathematics for 2017 were 38%; and in 2018 went down to 35%. Black or African American students in grades 3-5 scoring in levels 1 or 2 in ELA for 2017 were 44%; and in 2018 went up to 50%. Hispanics or Latino students scoring in grades 3-5 scoring in levels 1 or 2 in ELA for 2017 were 47%; and in 2018 went down to 32%. As a result of these findings we feel that there is a need for teachers to reassess their knowledge and skill-set of reaching these students through their lessons and work together collaboratively to help these targeted students meet proficient levels on the NYS ELA and Math state exams. Building off of the strengths on the School Environmental Survey's area in collaboration: 100% of teachers surveyed say that they are actively trying to improve their teaching, and 100% of teachers surveyed say that teachers design instructional programs together we can conclude that teachers will reassess their curriculum and differentiated to tasks to meet the needs of the targeted at risk subgroups. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 0  Our annual goal by June 26, 2019, as a result of all teachers collaborating to redesign curriculum and make sure targeted subgroups' backgrounds are addressed, 85% of Black or African American students, and Hispanic or Latino students, will achieve a proficiency level of 3 or 4, as measured by the NYS 2019 ELA exam. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will engage in Grade Level Impact Team inquiry work once a week, that will focus on incorporating students' cultural and linguistic backgrounds into their practice Students, Teachers Teachers Teams Weekly starting September 18th, 2018-June 25th, 2019 ELL teacher will meet with the Instructional Impact Team Monthly to engage in strategies of how teachers can help their Grade Inquiry Teams incorporate students' cultural and linguistic backgrounds into their practice. ELL Teacher, Impact Team, Grade Teams Monthly starting September5th, 2018-June 26th, 2019 ELL Teacher, Instructional Impact Team, Data Inquiry Impact Teams Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families by encouraging them to share their cultures. Grades will integrate a Culminating Cultural Celebration in May, where all students are encouraged to participate where they can share their dress, food, and language of their native countries. Siblings from other grades will be included, and all parents are encouraged to attend. Our ELL teacher will engage parents through our November 2018 open house, sharing resources (books and computers) for parents of ELL students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Weekly Common Planning Time Monday Instructional Impact Team Meetings Social Studies World Cultures Curriculum Books 2  iPads, Computers ELL Teacher Monday planning time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31st, 2019, all teachers will answer a Survey to indicate that we are meeting our June 2019 annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Google Forms Survey will be used as the measurement of progress for our mid-point benchmark. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After analyzing the results of the 2017-1`8 School Quality Environment Survey, Effective School Leadership section of the Framework, we found that 96% of families say that the principal promotes family and community involvement in the school. After analyzing both demographic and biographical data, we identified an increase in our Asian/Pacific Islander student population in the school over a two year period. As a result, we identified cultural differences, learning barriers and communication barriers within these special marginalized populations. This prompted us to make conservative efforts to understand these populations at a deeper level. This initiative focuses on perception data where we provide these marginalized subgroups with opportunities to educate the school on cultural background experiences and performance learning styles, as well as to create opportunities to better communicate with families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 26th, 2019, 100% of families surveyed will feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school as measured by the School Quality Environment Survey. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School administration will collectively engage in and provide access to workshops/PD, designed to support teachers in meeting the instructional focus. Teachers, Administration School administration will engage in Data Inquiry Team meetings on their supervisory grades. Administration will be both a leader, and an active listener, engaging in ideas to help teachers find strategies to meet targeted students. Teachers, Administration Monthly from Sept. 5th, 2018 - June 26th, 2019 Weekly from Sept. 17th 2018 - June 26th, 2019. School Administration, Teachers School Administration, Data Inquiry Grade Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parents Association Meetings will give parents an insight to their school leader's impact on their child's learning and the school environment. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monday after-school workshop/PD times. Tuesday Data Inquiry Team Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 5  By January 31st, 2019, families will answer a survey to indicate how they feel regarding how the principal works to create a sense of community in the school to ensure that we are meeting our June 2019 annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Google Forms Survey will be used as the measurement of progress for our mid-point benchmark. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school has many strengths relative to the framework under Strong Family-Community Ties. Under the school environment survey we scored we scored over 96% in all areas in outreach to parents. After analyzing both demographic and biographical data. We identified an increase in our Asian/Pacific Islander student population in the school over a two year period. As a result, we identified cultural differences, learning barriers and communication barriers within these special marginalized populations. This prompted us to make conservative efforts to understand these populations at a deeper level. This initiative focuses on perception data where we provide these marginalized subgroups with opportunities to educate the school on cultural background experiences and performance learning styles, as well as to create opportunities to better communicate with families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of our needs assessment 100% of families surveyed will say that the school communicates with them about how families can help children learn as measured by the 2019 School Environment Survey. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Parents will be invited to participate in a series of three focus groups targeting marginalized subgroups Monthly Newsletters highlighting titles of culturally diverse materials that are being used in the classroom. Holiday Fairs, Book Fairs, parents can join and mingle with students and staff Administrations, Teachers, Students, Parents October, 2018. Administration, ELL Teacher February, 2019, and May 2019. Teachers, Students, Administration, Parents September 5th, 2018-June 26th, 2019 Administration, SLT, PTA, ELL Teacher, Teachers, Students Administration, PTA, Teachers Administration, Staff, Teachers, Students, Parents October 2018, November 2018, December 2018, March 2019, May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NY Public Library Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers-Tuesday parent engagement time, and draft Monthly Parent Newsletters. Impact Team will meet Monthly SLT meet monthly 8  Parent/Family activities will take place both during the school day and at night in efforts to accommodate the members of our school community School Safety Agent on staff during nightly parent meetings Computers, iPads for use of School Website Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31st, 2019, there will 100% of parents showing a positive response from families reporting that we are meeting our June 2019 annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Google Forms survey will be used as the measurement of progress for our mid-point benchmark. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students reading below grade level. Mathematics Students not mastering skills aligned to the Common Core Standards for that grade level. Science In class assessments Social Studies In class assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher observation and evaluation Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Close Reading strategies, Focused writing instruction utilizing the writing process Close Reading strategies, Focused writing instruction utilizing the writing process Close Reading strategies, Focused writing instruction utilizing the writing process Close Reading strategies, Focused writing instruction utilizing the writing process Behavioral modification, peer mediation, conflict resolution Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, one-to-one, differentiation Small group, one-to-one, differentiation Small group, one-to-one, differentiation Small group, one-to-one, differentiation Small group, one-to-one counseling When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ELL Academy (Fridays – After school from Jan. June), RTI(Jan.-April), AIS Pull Out Services (During school day from Jan. – April ELL Academy (Fridays – After school from Jan. June), RTI (Jan. - April), AIS Pull Out Services (During school day from Jan. – April ELL Academy (Fridays – After school from Jan. June), RTI (Jan. - April), AIS Pull Out Services (During school day from Jan. – April ELL Academy (Fridays – After school from Jan. June), RTI (Jan. - April), AIS Pull Out Services (During school day from Jan. – April During the school day 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1 If we receive STH we will provide them with all of the books and materials needed to be successful in school. When these students arrive at school we will make sure that they are provided with school breakfast, and at lunch school lunch. We will work with the parents to help them with any of their needs in order to help their children meet their highest potential. We will have the students and their families work with our guidance, social worker, family worker, and parent coordinator to help meet their needs. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 3  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 4  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 50, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, and Parent Association as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school's involvement programs. This information will be maintained by the school. P.S. 50 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology 6  ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community PS 50’s Parent Association supports students and teachers by maintaining open communication with the school and families and fostering positive involvement. Our PA is responsible for the following activities: ● Meetings scheduled monthly in both the morning and evening on a rotating basis ● Family outings to neighboring restaurants providing a sense of community ● School functions including, but not limited to: o Arts to Remember workshop o Holiday Dances o Picture Day o Senior activities and commencement o Staten Island Yankee night o End of school year on-site carnival o Holiday fairs and bake sales ● Designating responsibilities to class parents to assist and volunteer in their children's classrooms ● Acting as liaison between federation, parents and administration ● Enforcing safety (along with administration) of daily arrival through our Stop, Drop Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing Parent Involvement Policy, parent members of the school’s Parent Association,as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: 7  ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact ● Ensure that funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, and the Parent Association. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, example: student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Learning Environment Survey Report ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed ● Conduct events where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, and Parent Association ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events ● Update school website with parent materials/links and parenting resources ● Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress ● Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand 8  School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 50, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. ● Provide high quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables the participating children to meet the State’s student academic achievement standards as follows: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● Providing teachers and students with materials which support the Common Core State Standards ● Providing English Language Learners (ELL) with additional services such as an ELL Academy. ● Providing at risk students with Response through Intervention (RTI) services ● Identifying at risk students through Teachers College Reading and Writing Assessments ● Offering Consultant Teaching (SETSS) and ESL for children in need ● Offering self-sustaining after-school programs that educate and encourage the whole child ● Collaborative Team Teaching on grades K-5 ● Offer 12:1:1 classes Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● Using academic learning time efficiently ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards ● Offering high quality instruction in all content areas ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships The Public School 50 will: ● Communicate with parents and provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide reports as follows: ● Parents can be notified of important information through an automated phone/text messaging (Remind App) 9  ● Parents will receive progress reports (report cards) 3 times a year (fall, spring, and end of school year) ● Parents can also be kept updated about assessments and specifically targeted skills practices for their child through the NYC Schools Account website ● Parents can obtain school information through the school website ( www.ps50si.org ) ● Parents are informed of school policies and other useful information through our Parent Handbook, which is posted on the school website. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are discussed with parents each year I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Provide parents reasonable access to staff. Specifically, staff will be available for consultation with parents as follows. ● Curriculum conferences invite parents to rally together as a community ● Parents are invited to attend concerts and productions performed in the Arts ● Parents will have the opportunity to observe their child’s class during open house and school-wide activities ● Parents will be invited to celebrations highlighting student work ● Parents will be invited to special night-time events such as curriculum night, when children come to school with their parents to showcase what they have learned in school Hold parent-teacher conferences (at least bi-annually in schools) during which this Compact will be discussed as it relates to the individual child’s achievement. Specifically, those conferences will be held: 0  ● In the Fall : November, 2018 ● In the Spring: March, 2019 Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend) ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents ● Ensuring that funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time, as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary 1  ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes) ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by promptly reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Leadership Teams ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child Parent Responsibilities We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways: ● Supporting my child’s learning by making education a priority in our home by:  Making sure my child is on time and prepared everyday for school  Monitoring attendance/lateness  Talking with my child about his/her school activities everyday  Scheduling daily homework time  Monitoring my child’s reading logs; ensuring daily reading  Providing an environment conducive for study  Making sure that homework is completed 2   Monitoring the amount of television my children watch  Volunteering in my child’s classroom  Participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education  Promoting positive use of my child’s extracurricular time  Participating in school activities on a regular basis  Staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school district received by my child or by mail and responding, as appropriate  Reading together with my child every day  Providing my child with a library card  Communicating positive values and character traits, such as respect, hard work and responsibility  Respecting the cultural differences of others  Helping my child accept consequences for negative behavior  Being aware of and following the rules and regulations of the school and district  Supporting the school discipline policy  Express high expectations and offer praise and encouragement or achievement ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time III. Student Responsibilities ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions ● Show respect for myself, other people and property ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully ● Always try my best to learn Student Responsibilities We as students will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. Specifically, we will: ● Come to school ready to do our best and be the best 3  ● Come to school with all the necessary tools of learning-pens, pencils, books etc. ● Listen and follow directions ● Participate in class discussions and activities ● Be honest and respect the rights of others ● Follow the school’s class’ rules of conduct ● Follow the school’s dress code ● Ask for help when we don’t understand ● Do our homework every day and ask for help when we need to ● Study for test and assignments ● Read at least 30 minutes every day outside of school time ● Read at home with our parents; ● Get adequate rest every night; ● Use the library to get information and find books that we enjoy reading; ● Give to our parents or to the adult who is responsible for our welfare, all notices and information we receive at school every day. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 3 1 2 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: There are currently 38 ELLs at PS 50. The NYSESLAT results revealed the following data: 52% received Commanding 36% received Expanding 10% received Transitional 2% received Entering 18% of students moved up within the same level 43% of students moved up 1 level 75% of last year's Ells are in Expanding this year Our direct instruction supplemental program is our after school ELL Academy. The rationale is to provide our English Language Learners with additional assistance to promote academic progress. This year, we believe we must focus in on the reading and writing modalities, due to the NYSESLAT results. The results revealed that 30% of the children in Expanding, Transitional and Entering require support in reading and 45% of them require support in writing. Therefore, we will be focusing on those 2 modalities for the 2018-2019 school year. We feel that by meeting their needs in these 2 areas will allow them to reach Commanding level on the NYSESLAT and will enable them to reach 3;s and 4's on the ELA and Math exams. All of our Ells in grades K-2 are invited to the Ell Homework Club, which is on Wednesday from 2:45 - 4:45, commencing on Wednesday October 10 and continuing through Wednesday December 19, 2018. All of our ELLs in grades K through 5 are invited to the Ell Academy, which is on Wednesday from 2:45-4:45, commencing on Wednesday January 16 and continuing through Wednesday April 10, 2019. All of the instruction is delivered in English. There are 3 teachers: 1 certified ESL, and 2 content area teachers We will be using a computer based reading and writing program called, MYON. MYON has both formative and summative assessments, as well as a writing component. The children will be grouped according to their needs, within grade bands, which are K-2, and 3 -5. The groups are as follows: K-2 - Small group instruction using MYON Small group reading and retelling using leveled libraries Small group on computer using MYON reading 3-5 - Whole Group - Jazz Chants Writing strategies and skills Small group on computer using MYON, and individual writing The groups are instructed by the content area teachers, and 1 ESL teacher rotates to both groups. Materials - MYON, leveled libraries by Teacher Created Materials, and Jazz Chants . 6  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development is provided for all classroom teachers by Mrs. Murphy (TESOL) Professional development focuses on strategies and best practices to promote academic achievement for ELLs. This year, we will be studying and discussing the book, "Research Based Strategies for English Language Learners" by Denise Rea and Sandra Mercuri. All classroom teachers of ELLs, as well as Cluster teachers will be participating in this professional development, which will take place during the following mandated PD Mondays for 1 hour: November 19- Modeling: Show Them, Help Them, Let them do It December 17-Thinking About Thinking: Develop a Mental Framework January 28-The Reframing Information February 25-Developing Conversational and Academic Language In addition, our ESL teacher conducts on-going individual PD to classroom teachers with ELLs, on how to use MYON. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: PS 50 welcomes parents of all children to be a member of our academic community. We hire translators, when necessary. We encourage our teachers to use the Department of Education's Translation and Interpretation Unit. The ESL teacher distributes the phone number, and it is visible in our lobby, and general office. In addition, all notices are supplied in various languages, when available. TESOL distributes a PD survey to her parents of ELLS, and assesses their needs, based on the results of the survey. She then develops the PD plan to answer their needs. Each session is one hour. The PD schedule is as follows: New Parent Orientation - September 24 Parent Orientation - September 24 Homework Help Program - October 24 Common Core Standards - November 22 MYON/ DOE Website - December 20 7  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities NYS Testing - January 30 Vocabulary - February 27 Cultural Enrichment - Year in Review - March 27 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $7419.00  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff $ 1236.00 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. $2473.00 Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel $0 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. ELL Academy $55.00 x 3hrs.= $110.00 $110.00 x 3 teachers = $330.00 $330.00 x 12 sessions = $3960.00 $110.00 (1 session TESOL) 110.00 Total $4119.00 ELL HW Club: $55.00 x 2 hours = $110.00 $110.00 x 3 teachers = $330.00 $330 x 10 sessions = $3300.00 Independent Reading ipad program - PD Session 1 - Digital Reading Environment Session 2- Multi Modal Learning through Media Independent Reading Ipad program K-5 Finish Line for Ells: Workbooks K-5 Finish Line for Ells: Teachers Editions N/A 8 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A PD - Cultural Enrichment Parent Engagement N/A Other TOTAL $0 $1236.00 $12,366.00 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name Frank Hankinson Borough Staten Island School Number 050 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Joseph Santello Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Joan Murphy-ESL Teacher/Subject Area Nicole Maddaloni- K Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal Janet Miller Coach School Counselor Parent Judy Mason-Parent Parent Coordinator Eileen Westgate-PC Field Support Center Staff Member Nilda Pabon-Kraft Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 771 0 Total number of ELLs 51 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.61%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses the TC-pro assessment tool (TCRWP) to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. We use an assessment calendar which requires that teachers assess reading at least 3 times a year, and are reported in the TC website. The NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT are both used to guide instructional planning. The teachers are updated and informed of the individual results of the tests, by the ESL teacher, and they then use this information when they are planning.The teachers are given time every week to write their curriculum maps,delving deep into lesson plans that include differentiated tasks, tiering the lessons,and formative assessments that are standards based. When planning, teachers are differentiating, based on students' needs. Small group instruction, with a great deal of partnership conversation is included for our ELLs. In addition, the ESL teacher spends time with the classroom teachers when they are planning. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 1  The TC assessment window is opened 3 times during the school year; November, January, and June. The Assessment Calendar is distributed at the beginning of the school year, and addressed at the 1st. Faculty meeting. Teachers receive an e-mail telling them when the assessment window is open. After the window closes, administration monitors that all data is complete. If not, teacher is notified. Administrators circulate and sit in on weekly planning. In addition there is a school assessment calendar which must be complied with. The beginning, middle and end of year math assessment results are recorded on scantrons that the school created for grades K-5, in addition to the assessments in the Go Math curriculum. The results are analyzed by the teachers in conjunction with the ESL teacher and administrators. We also have a writing calendar where 3 baseline pieces are mandated before the writing unit begins. Also the Readygen program includes reading assessments that are completed and give teachers valuable information on their Ell students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We will continue to evaluate the success of our programs for Ells by examining the achievement history of each student. We will compare the results from the NYSESLAT and the New York State ELA, Math, and Science, test. All modalities of reading, writing, speaking and listening will be compared and addressed. Then we will compare the result on each grade level to view trends and patterns to address the ESL student needs. TESOL will collaborate with classroom teachers to implement an instructional plan based on these results. Each and every one of our Ells has become a member of our academic community of learners. The teachers implement pre-assessments, in reading, writing and math in their curriculum units, and examine the results. Teachers mark and discuss their children's results on the benchmark assessments, and the Ell periodic assessments., with the ESL teacher.They meet at grade meetings to identify the areas of need, and how to address them. This is the time that they develop lesson plans to meet their diverse population's needs. This process is repeated throughout the year, with according adjustments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have implemented an RTI program for during the school day, for grades 3-5. A list of student names are compiled using data, teachers recommendation, along with NYS test scores .In addition, in the classroom, teachers implement tier 1 RTI, in small group instruction for all grades. Saturday RTI is offered for children in grades 3-5 as well. We are planning to resume our Title 111 ELL Academy once a week, and a homework club for Ells once a week. The school leadership constantly attends grade meetings, and is always engaged in professional conversation with all constituents. The completed scantrons are collected, entered, and reviewed by the administrators. The administrators also check that independent reading levels are entered into the TC website, on a timely basis. Right from the beginning of the school year, the ESL teacher shares the NYSESLAT results with the teachers, and continually meets with the classroom teachers to update them regarding any data or important information. At grade meetings, the ESL teacher always collaborates on lessons to address Ell needs, and progress, based on assessments. When administrators observe the teachers, they are constantly reviewing how the subgroups needs in the classroom are being met, in addition to the other students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We are continually reviewing various data throughout the school year. The teachers analyze various formative and summative assessments. When planning, they use the data results to write their lessons, which include differentiation to meet students' needs. The NYS ELA and Math results are compiled into an Item Skills Analysis. They then study the types of questions that the students need more support in. They write lessons including small group instruction to address the areas of need. It is also determined what additional support services will provide the students what they need to be successful. We look at the following: English and home language literacy, classroom teacher, ESL teacher and parent recommendations and requests, student work samples, and consider the number of years the child has been in the ENL program. RTI includes 3 levels of intervention, which if needed, is implemented both during the school day and, in our after school ELL Academy, and Saturday RTI Program. During the school day, Tier 1 instruction includes differentiation to meet students' 2  diverse needs. Tier 11 consists of small group activities in a separate setting with specific learning goals. Tier 111 includes rigorous individualized instruction. We utilize the Step-by-Step Approach. We use data from the ELA and Math state tests, Performance Tasks, Periodic Assessments, and unit assessments. Teachers assess children's individual needs in the classroom by examining their class assessments in conjunction with Performance Tasks, Schoolnet results,, their student work, and informally listening to their conversations. Based on these results, teachers create their plans to formulate groups so children can get differentiated tiered instructional support, based on needs. Tier 1 meets 80% of student needs, by small group instruction. Students who are then identified as needing more support by using baseline assessments, in addition to all other classroom assessments, then become the target population who require Tier 11 and Tier 111 intervention. These children are offered additional support in our RTI, grades 3-5, free-standing RTI program, during the school day, in addition to our Saturday RTI Program, homework club, and our after school ELL Academy. Tier !- Our teachers use standards-based curriculum which consists of rigorous evidence based curriculum. We use Readygen and Go Math. The teachers plans include, small group instruction, differentiated learning tasks, vocabulary, and conversation. The tasks are rigorous, critical thinking tasks. The teachers implement a baseline first, and the ESL teacher gathers information for the HLIS, which is shared, and provides background knowledge on each one of her ELLs. The teacher also ensures in her plans, that in depth academic conversation is taking place in the classroom. They use Tier 1, 2, and 3 vocabulary. Progress is constantly monitored by examining the baseline, teaching into it, and then administering other assessments completed by the children. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT data (RLAT) reveals that 66% of our ELLs performed at the Commanding or Expanding level, across the grades. Out of the 12 students, who we were able to compare from last year to this year, we noticed that 7 made gains in their total score (58%). In analyzing modality data more closely, we noticed that 58% of the children, went down in the listening section. All 4 children in grade 1 decreased in listening. We will make the classroom teachers aware of these results. We will continue with small group instruction, and differentiation. We will be using MYON for listening., both in the classroom and with the ESL teacher. All teachers will be working on listening strategies, using headsets and NYSESLAT prep material. We will encourage more inter-active conversation, included in instruction, in both the standalone and integrated programs. In addition, partnerships, group presentations, and Turn & Talk will be included in curriculum map lesson planning, as well as by the ESL teacher. Teachers will implement TPR (Total Physical Response) so that students become aware of the direct correlation between listening to oral directions and physically responding. Also, the teachers are using the smart board, on a daily basis, for recorded speech. We want children to make connections between all 4 modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. In ELA 50% got a 3 or 2. In Math, 63% received a 4, 3, or 2. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? When the NYSESLAT results are in, they are shared with the classroom teachers, facilitated by the ENL teacher. In addition, the data is shared with the parents. The ENL teacher conducts parent meetings. Teachers have collaborative planning time to discuss data and plan instruction for groupings. School leaders sit in on grade meetings, and have conversations with the classroom teachers, as well as reviewing assessment binders. The leaders monitor the compliance of the assessment calendar, by going into the TC website, as well as conducting classroom observations. The Assistant Principal ensures that assessments are both implemented and analyzed by checking on Schoolnet, and reviewing in house created scantrons on a continual basis. The ESL teacher collaborates and plans with the teachers, on ESL methodologies. She also facilitates professional development. After assessment results are available, the ESL teacher meets with the classroom teachers during planning time to help address the children's needs. The Assistant Principal gets the scores from the L2rpt report, at the beginning of the school year and shares it with the ESL teacher, who then turn- keys the results to the teachers. 3  After the NYS ELA and Math results are in, we use the Item Skills Analysis to drive instruction. We disseminate the information and teachers use this for their planning instruction. They address the common misunderstandings so students will be successful. The teachers use formative assessments that are in the standards based curriculum, and record the data. They then make instructional decisions when planning instruction. The Language Allocation Policy Team assess the results of the NYSESLAT, and identify the trends, and then share with the classroom teachers. The ESL teacher reviews the NYSITELL data, and collaborates with the classroom teachers to make sound instructional decisions, ie. RTI. According to ATS scores, we follow all required state mandates in program selection for our students. Student work is reviewed both on a daily basis by the classroom teacher, and during our Data Inquiry Team work. The focus of our Data Inquiry Team work is student work. This year we are focusing on writing. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Presently we use two organizational models; Integrated and Standalone. They are serviced in periods of forty five minutes depending on their particular score on the most recent NYSESLAT or NYSITELL. Beginners will receive 180 minutes of standalone, and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Low Intermediate students will receive a total of 360 minutes per week; 180 minutes will be standalone, and 180 minutes is integrated ENL/ELA. Intermediate and Advanced will receive 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA. Proficient will receive 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA. Based on the NYSESLAT scores and NYSITELL scores, currently the Standalone program is being administered in Grades K and 5. Both models are followed in Grades K-5. In the standalone, all 4 modalities are addressed, by the ESL teacher, in a separate small setting. Integrated includes the ESL teacher and the subject teacher in the classroom setting. We are very proud of our ELLs academic learning and growth, and we attribute it to the following: Students' work and assessments are evaluated continuously throughout the year using a variety of data. Teachers are involved in curriculum planning aligned to the CCLS and reflect and adjust based on students' needs. Teachers collaborate and understand how their students learn, and expect high levels of achievement. Parental involvement is encouraged and expected. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: At this time, we do not have TBE, due to the parent selection. c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: At this time, we do not have DL, due to the parent selection. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 4  We review the current results of the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL to determine the exact units of study and staffing required to meet the needs of the children. All ENL classes including integrated and standalone offer home language support. The standalone units of study are taught by our ESL teacher, and the integrated are taught by a ESL teacher and a K-6 certified elementary teacher Presently we use two organizational models; Integrated and Standalone. They are serviced in periods of forty five minutes depending on their particular score on the most recent NYSESLAT or NYSITELL. Beginners will receive 180 minutes of standalone. The standalone program ensures intensive ELA training for the students. The ELA training is standards based, and grade appropriate. The instruction in the standalone program is delivered by our ESL teacher. Low Intermediate students will receive a total of 360 minutes per week; 180 minutes will be standalone, and 180 minutes is integrated ENL/ELA. Intermediate and Advanced will receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Proficient will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. . 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We use 2 program models; standalone and integrated ENL/ELA. All content areas are delivered in English as a Second Language, in general education and special education. Native language texts such as maps, dictionaries, texts, listening tapes and school notifications are available for all students. Our teachers use a combination of instructional approaches and methods to make content comprehensible to enrich language development. This includes; using the teaching of Lily Wong Fillmore, teachers use larger units of language by employing Juicy Words (layers of language in content areas) in Social Studies, Science and Math. . Teachers are infusing instructional strategies such as CALPS to build vocabulary and create academic language. All teachers use a balanced literacy approach which consists of the following components: independent reading and writing, shared reading, and interactive writing. Designing coherent instruction via writing curriculum maps which include the Common Core Learning Standards, allows both the classroom and ESL teachers to address student needs. Teachers use small group differentiated instruction based on assessment results. Teachers on each grade collaborate to ensure that all learning tasks are rigorous and aligned to the CCLS. Teachers make sound instructional decisions based on data, to provide language rich lessons. Presently, teachers are involved in self-reflection using the Danielson Framework, to improve their practice. When our ESL teacher participates in integrated ENL/ELA, the two teachers in the room employ a parallel model of co-teaching. The ESL teacher uses English proficient peers to serve as language models for the ENL children. Teacher teams meet regularly to participate in inquiry conversations centered on improving student work. The following programs are Used : Readygen Reading Program Go Math MYON Reading/Computer Readers’ Theater Fundations 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All children who have been identified as possible ELLs are tested with the NYSITELL within 10 days. Any Spanish speaking child who fails the NYSITELL in English, is then given the Spanish Lab. This allows our staff to view both language scores and build on their academic strengths. Every Spring, ELLs are tested to determine their English proficiency, using the NYSESLAT. In addition, the ESL teacher employs the MYON Reading Program, which assesses the children in English, and Spanish.Also, NYS offers assessments in Spanish and Chinese, that will be administered, if necessary. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer 5  c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. At present, we do not have any SIFE students, however, ENL would be available to them, in addition to all other programs offered. If a SIFE student has been identified, after completing the HLIS and interview for child and parent, along with the Literacy Evaluation for Newcomer and SIFE, by the ESL teacher, the ESL teacher would collaborate with the classroom teacher in planning. The results of all of these assessments would be reviewed by the classroom teacher, the ESL teacher, and The Language Proficiency Team. The teachers would have conversations with the student. The student would be given baseline assessments. Our TESOL, along with Classroom and Speech teachers will collaborate whenever there is a need to share professional methodology and /or particular concerns. Teachers would create lesson plans based on students' needs. Small group instruction consisting of differentiated lessons would be implemented. b.Newcomers would face social,linguistic, and academic issues in their new environment. First, if possible, the teacher would identify anyone in the class who speaks the same language for support, If no one does speak the same language, the ESL teacher would try to find another student in the school who speaks the same language. IN addition, a buddy would be assigned to the child in the classroom. The teachers would also contact the parent, with the use of the Translation Department. Also, the ESL teacher would meet with the parents throughout the year to update them. Newcomers receive the maximum amount of minutes, which is 360. They receive 180 minutes of standalone, and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. In addition, the ESL teacher provides support to the classroom teacher, giving strategies, suggestions, and conferencing with the teacher. Also, the ESL teacher meets with the parents, and ensures that any notices go home in the native language, if requested. The ELLs are also invited into our extended day program, and the ELL Academy,(Title lll Program) This particular group of Ells will receive the mandated minutes of ENL instruction. Teachers engage students in numerous read alouds throughout the day. In addition to hearing the language, they are encouraged to act out the stories. We use MYON Reading Program, to supplement Readygen, for these students. Children are taught to create individual dictionaries using pictures to assist them. Partner and choral reading is employed by the ENL teacher. There is open communication with the parents to be involved in the home school connection. We make use of Dr. Filmore’s layers of language, by having children write synonyms on different colored index cards. In math, children use manipulatives in solving problems. They use pictures, numbers, and words to verbalize their thinking. c. Ells who have been receiving services four to six years will be identified and continued to be serviced. Their individual data which includes; ELA, Math, NYSESLAT will be analyzed to determine what next step should be put in place for those children to succeed. The ESL teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher on how to best meet their specific needs. If necessary, based on data results, we may explore additional support through other interventions, specifically RTI and/or placement. These children are also invited to our ELL Academy, extended day, and our RTI Saturday Program. Teachers will continue to receive professional development. Conferencing and small group instruction is used to address each modality. Math word walls, and math sentence frames are used. MYON is also available to these children. d.We presently have no long term Ells, due to the fact that this is a K-5 school. We would use the RTI model for long term ELLs. RTI includes 3 levels of intervention, which if needed, is implemented both during the school day and, in our after school ELL Academy, and Saturday RTI Program. During the school day, Tier 1 instruction includes differentiation to meet students' diverse needs. Tier 11 consists of small group activities in a separate setting with specific learning goals. Tier 111 includes rigorous individualized instruction. We utilize the Step-by-Step Approach. We use data from the ELA and Math state tests, Performance Tasks, and Periodic Assessments. Teachers assess children's individual needs in the classroom by examining their classroom assessments in conjunction with Performance Tasks, Schoolnet results,, their student work, and informally listening to their conversations. Based on these results teachers create their plans to formulate groups so children can get differentiated tiered instructional support, based on needs. Tier 1 meets 80% of student needs, by small group instruction. Students who are then identified as needing more support by using baseline assessments, in addition to all other classroom assessments, then become the target population who require Tier 11 and Tier 111 intervention. These children are offered additional support in our RTI, grades 3-5, free-standing program, during the school day, in addition to our Saturday RTI Program, homework club, and our after school ELL Academy. 6e. Former ELLs receive testing accommodations, separate location, time and a half, word for word dictionaries. Former ELLs receive 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL/ELA. The ENL teacher co-teaches with the Common Branch Teacher, in the classroom. This integrated instruction includes content area subject area, and English language development using ENL 6  strategies. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies adapted from Kate Kinsella's Academic Language & Discourse Frames are used: Expressing an opinion, asking for clarification, paraphrasing, soliciting a response, agreeing and disagreeing, comparing ideas, summarizing, and reporting or citing evidence. Students' IEP's are discussed with our TESOL, in conjunction with self-contained or ICT teachers. All school personnel are aware of the student’s daily needs and/or testing modifications. Teachers use both formative and summative assessment data to determine how to group students to meet their needs. Close reading, small group instruction, oral language, maps, and time lines are used. They activate prior language, build on background knowledge, use scaffolded instruction, and provide opportunities for oral interaction. Teachers modify their teacher talk, which includes; rate of speech, enunciation, and controlled vocabulary.The following programs are used: Fundations - This program offers tactile, oral, and aural skills for the children Pearson Ready Gen- a comprehensive balanced literacy reading program that offers additional support for SWD's and ELLs Readers’ Theatre- acting out of texts encourages more involvement and builds self-esteem MYON -Reading Program Let's Talk About It-Oral language instruction, develops speaking and listening skills Read alouds, think aloud time, role playing, use of visuals, charts, graphs, tables, Venn diagrams, choral reading, reading and writing using pictures, layers of language cards, jazz, chants, turn & talk 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We have a wonderful hard working school assessment team, who meet by-monthly with the Principal. At these meetings, they discuss the children with IEP's. The team is made up of the school psychologist, social worker, guidance counselor, and IEP teacher. Members of the team have conversations with the classroom teachers, as well as the ESL teacher, and review students' work. We then place children by looking at their their IEP's along with their goals, and see which class setting would best meet their needs. We have to comply with the 60% 40% ratio, and of course, speak to parents. The ESL teacher provides integrated model, and/or standalone model, based on NYSESLAT scores. We are able to offer our Ell-SWDs well balanced schedules and instructional flexibility though the engagement of ICT classroom instruction, with licensed general and special education teachers. When mandated by their IEP, support services by a licensed paraprofessional are employed. All P.S. 50 teachers are employed in their particular license of expertise whereby they are able to address the needs of the Ell-SWDs on a current basis. They are supported by our TESOL, Joan Murphy. All related service providers collaborate with the classroom teacher, and the ENL teacher. These children use the same reading and math programs, in addition to supplemental programs, such as MYON. At inquiry data time, all teachers meet to discuss their children's needs and work. There is on-going articulation, flexible scheduling, and native language support. Presently,we offer ICT classes within all grades to meet the diverse needs of ELL SWD's within the least restrictive environment. Currently, we have one K/1/2 bridge self-contained class, one 3rd. grade 12:1:1, one 4th grade 12:1:1, one 5th grade 12:1:1, and , and one 5th grade 8:1:1. class. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The ELL Academy is offered after school for grades K-5. 70% of our ELLs attended the ELL Academy. 40% of our grades 2-5 ELLs attended our RTI Saturday program. Our target population was those children who received 1s on state exams, and need extra support. Targeted interventions - Tier 1 get in class support, Tier 2- 3-5 students get supplemental instruction for 20-30 minutes 3-5x a week. Tier 3- 30 - 60 minutes 4x a week in a group of 2. The interventions are matched to students' specific 7  needs, direct, systematic, instructional skills. Reading - phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension. We take a multi-sensory approach. Writing- writing process using TC. Math - use Number Talks for number sense, automaticity, mathematical reasoning, problem solving, providing answers and proving them, composing and de-composing numbers. Presently, all programs are in English. Translators and staff members are available upon request from parents. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue to use the computer based reading program, MYON, which proves successful for the students., and The Wednesday Ell homework Club. This was very well received by the ELL parents. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The school has not had a bilingual program in place, therefore none has been closed. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All Ells receive the same resources and programs in our school. All after school clubs, , art, cooking, , talent shows, plays are open to the complete academic community. All K-5 Ells are invited to our Title III after school enrichment program on Fridays, (Ell Academy) all grade2-5 Saturday program, and our RTI pull out program. An invitation in English and their first language gets distributed to the students. A second way of communicating the parents is oral communication with a translator. All invitations have a tear-off response which gets collected by the teacher. She keeps these tear-offs, to track their enrollment and attendance in these programs..We also offer a latch key after school program, where children get help with their homework. Reading volunteers from Staten Island Mental Health come in to read with kindergarten. In addition, we offer the RTI Program on Saturdays to give extra support. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELA- All of the materials that we use provide engagement through reading, writing, listening, and speaking. These materials are available to all teachers to use for small group instruction, conversation, and multi-cultural instruction. We employ a varied amount of instructional materials in all Ell instruction. This includes; Recorded Books Sound Reading Solutions. Author and Performer Caroline Graham-Jazz Chants, Jazz Chant Fairy Tales Eye Openers- reading text Fundation and Sonday Programs Rigby-English in My Pocket Reading Rainbow ESL Focused Literature; Watch the Stars Come Out, The Lotus Seed Author Tova Ackerman- The Art of Reading, Puppet Drama and Whole Language Author Elizabeth Claire; ESL Teacher’s Activities Kit Transcultural picture Word List, and Bilingual Dictionaries Attanasio-Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT Academic Vocabulary Toolkit by Kate Kinsella MYON Computer Reading Program Let's Talk About It Smart Boards Oral Language Program-Let's Talk About It Math Supporting ELLs in Math Class -grades K-2 and 3-5 Number Sense- grades 1-5 Social Studies English in my pocket grade K-1 Science 8  Readers for Writers Rigby , early, emergent, and fluent Eye-Openers K-6 Social Studies and Science Imagination Creations Inc. Smart boards, tape recorders, cassette players, computers 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We use bilingual recorded books. We also use Smart Readers (Bilingual stories told at different rates of speed). We use charts and posters. We use hands on and visuals. We also use staff volunteers, and the Translation Unit. When possible, PS 50 employs bilingual translators when the state mandated standardized tests are unavailable in the native language. Open school day/night communication between the parents and the school staff is also available through DOE Translation Dept. We print out various notices, in other languages, to go home to parents.We employ children friendly multilingual websites to support our ELLs. All bilingual children have access to bilingual dictionaries in their classroom and throughout the school if needed. The Ell students are a resource to the monolingual class by sharing and providing background information on their language, customs, and holidays particular to their ethnicities and region of the world that they have originated from. We started using MYON ( computer reading program) that the children use in school and at home. Mrs. Murphy invites the parents in to learn the program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We use standards based, age appropriate materials that service the children's mandates, required by NYS. Required services support and resources correspond to both the age and grade level of the total Ell population. All teachers are aware of the particular IEP goals, and student needs, for students with IEP's, as well as Ells. Each classroom teacher and cluster teacher has the individual education plan for their particular student in their classroom so that they may reference it when needed. In addition for the total ELL population in general, we offer support services which corresponds to their ages and grade levels, such as the RTI program which includes tier 1, 2, and 3, interventions, and we offer the ELL Academy, to the total ELL population. Reading volunteers come in to read with kindergarten students. All teachers use small group instruction, based on their needs. ESL students who receive services via pull-out model, is in accordance with their age and grade level. The building leaders observe the teachers, and review lesson plans continually to maintain compliance with expectations. In addition, the leaders are consistently checking data throughout the school 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share the building with another school, therefore we do not share resources. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All incoming kindergarten parents are welcome to enroll in PS 50 in the Spring, before the fall session begins.Also, they may attend by choice our summer camp, which encompasses both play and academic instruction. Parents and their child may arrange to take a tour of our building, over the summer, with our Parent Coordinator, Eileen Westgate. Th Parent Coordinator is part of the welcoming committee to all new and existing members of our academic community. Parents are supplied with the Parent Coordinator' cell number, to help them to become a vital part of our community. The Counselor facilitates a Respect for All Assembly, and makes classroom visits on bullying, throughout, the school year. In addition, the SAPIS worker also visits the classrooms, and conducts lessons. All fifth grade staff meets with our TESOL to assist the ELLs as they transition into Middle School. Our staff takes part in workshops and small group instruction and teachers use strategies that transition into Junior High curriculum. Our staff is aware of the particular middle schools that provide ESL support to their Ell population. All fifth grade staff is aware of the particular procedures for state testing which deal with extended time, group size and location. Fifth grade teachers attend an 9  orientation session or meet with an orientation group from the Middle Schools. Ms. Tsiamanes (Guidance Counselor) offers various workshops such as bullying and respect to support our students transitioning from one school level to another. Mrs. Murphy contacts the ESL teachers of the incoming middle schools, and provides them with children's data on NYSESLAT, as well as academic and cultural background. The ESL teacher supports the teachers by attending Ell parent meetings , to discuss the middle school expectations for their children. The Guidance Counselor attends the following Professional Development: Respect for All Child Abuse Therapeutic Crisis Intervention De-Escalation Training 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have any DL programs. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? This year, we will be studying and discussing the book, " SIOP" Training for Elementary Teachers". All classroom teachers of ELLs, as well as Cluster teachers, special education teachers, school psychologist, Occupational and Physical therapists, Speech therapists, paras, assistant principals, ESL teacher , guidance counselor, social worker and Parent Coordinator will be participated in this professional development, which took place during the following mandated PD Mondays: November 6 - Levels of Language Proficiency December 4 - Connecting Content and Language Objectives January 8 - Instructional Techniques and Learning Strategies February 5 - Taxonomy for Learning, Teaching, and Assessing March - 5 - English Learner Grouping Configurations April - 9 - Let's Practice and Apply Jigsaw Activity May - Factors Contributing to High Levels of Student Engagement The ESL teacher meets with all teachers of Ell's, and facilitates PD on the RTI model. In addition to the above, during Common Preps and/ or during PD time, Mrs. Murphy collaborates with individual grades and or teachers, to discuss the reading and Math Program. (Ready gen and Go Math)), for ELL strategies. Also the Assistant Principal subscribes to; News and Opportunities for Educators of ELLs, and sends the ESL teacher to selected workshops. Last year, Mrs. Murphy attended all ELL Liason meetings facilitated by Mildred Cordova.This year our ESL teacher will attend all Staten Island Borough Field Support Center meetings. We also use the website: Stamford.edu, which offers on ELL courses on academic oral language and literacy. 0  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. During school year 2016-17, the ESL teacher attended a 3 day workshop on "SIOP" (Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol.) This was facilitated by Pearson. This year our ESL teacher will attend all Staten Island Borough Field Support Center meetings. We also use the website: Stamford.edu, which offers ELL courses on academic oral language and literacy. In addition, the ESL teacher meets with all teachers of Ell's, and facilitates PD using the RTI model for Ells. This Professional Development meets the new requirement of 15% of total hours of Ell specific professional development for teachers. This year for our ELL PD, the ESL teacher will be meeting with the teachers, on a monthly basis, to incorporate the SIOP model into lesson plans. (Mentioned in q. 1) Professional Development is provided for all classroom teachers in addition to any staff members who deliver instruction to our ELLs. Professional development focuses on strategies and best practices to promote academic achievement for ELLs. Mrs. Murphy also subscribes to the Division of Ell and Student Support, notifying her of Ell Professional Development offerings, and tries to attend the appropriate ones. This fulfills the 50% of total hours for ESL teachers specific Professional Development. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? PS 50 welcomes parents of all children to be a member of our academic community. We hire translators for all of our parents who have expressed a need for help on their blue cards.. Parents are a valuable force in the whole education of their child in and out of school. There are activities at night and during the day that parents can be part of. This includes game night where all families come and share a fun filled night of math based games. Parents that are available during day hours may be part of a lower grade reading group, Art Fair, productions to enhance our school, student/parent/teacher basketball games. We hire translators, when necessary. We encourage our teachers to use the Department of Education's Translation and Interpretation Unit. The ESL teacher distributes the phone number, to school personnel. In addition, all notices are supplied in various languages, by the PC, when available. The PD schedule is as follows: New Parent Orientation - September 13 Parent Orientation - September 13 Homework Help Program - October 17 Technology/MYON - November 21 DOE Website-ELL Parent Resources - December 19 NYS Testing - January 23 Vocabulary - February 13 Parent Surveys- March 13 April - Parent Questions, Issues, Concerns for the coming school year Cultural Enrichment - Year in review - May 8 Our Ell parents meet with our TESOL several times a year to address their needs and their student’s expectations. These meetings are held in the privacy of the ESL classroom on a one to one basis or as a group. Also, parents express their needs through a school translator from the Department of Education Bureau of Interpretation and Translation. Parents are provided a School Survey by the Department of Education to ensure that their particular needs are being addressed. Our Parent Coordinator works with all parents to aid them in becoming an integral part of our academic community through school workshops or events. 1  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2. All new Ell parents are invited to our annual parent orientation, whereby they are provided with information and program selection options. Mrs. Murphy sends a letter home, inviting them to the orientation, in their requested language. She then follows up with a phone call, with the assistance of the Interpretation and Translation Dept. She keeps a copy of all correspondence in her room , with an agenda and attendance sheet, and any sign off sheets. We contact the parents using in-person meetings, phone calls and letters. PS 50 welcomes parents of all children to be a member of our academic community. We hire translators, when necessary. We encourage our teachers to use the Department of Education's Translation and Interpretation Unit. The ESL teacher distributes the phone number, and it is visible in our lobby, and general office. In addition, all notices are supplied in various languages, when available. Parents are invited to Arts to Remember. Parents are invited to class Multicultural Days. Parents are invited to monthly PTA meetings. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Joseph Santello, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 50 School DBN: 31R050 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Joseph Santello Title Principal Janet Miller Assistant Principal Eileen Westgate Parent Coordinator Joan Murphy ENL/Bilingual Teacher Judy Mason Parent Nicole Maddaloni Teacher/Subject Area Anthony Lodico NildaPabon- Kraft Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/20/17 9/20/17 9/20/17 9/20/17 9/20/17 9/20/17 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31050 School Name: Frank Hankinson Superintendent: Vincenza Gallas The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Westgate Murphy PC ENL Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In the beginning of each school year, all students are given the student blue emergency cards, to be completed by the parents/guardians. These cards state what language the parents want to receive all communication from the school, in. This information is then input into ATS to generate the RAPL report. This fulfills the determination of primary language within 30 days. Once the cards come back completed, the Language Access Coordinator, compiles a list, based on language communication preferences. Both the ENL and the PC keep this record in their rooms. Then they notify the teachers, and any other appropriate staff. If a parent requests translation needs, Mrs. Westgate (LAC) will contact them with a translator from the Translation Unit. Any parent in the school who needs translation services, we provide either the Translation Unit's services, or we use one of our staff members, who speak the appropriate language. The parents then receive this support during any meeting, phone call, or 5  letter.The office personnel are also notified, so when any communication is distributed, they will send it in the requested language. All current records are updated in ATS, and are readily available. We look at the RAPL(Adult Preferred Languages) ATS report and collect data on parent written translation and oral interpretation needs. We survey the parents, on a yearly basis, to also find out if Translation Services is meeting their needs. Part 111 of the HLIS identifies the written and oral communication needs of our school community, that we review, in addition to look at the Emergency Contact cards. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Chinese Russian Arabic Spanish Italian Polish Belorussian Albanian 701 46 15 8 7 1 3 1 1 97% .06% .02% .01% .01% .01% .01% .01% .01% 701 44 16 8 7 1 2 1 1 97% .06 % .02% .01% .01% .01% .01% .01% .01% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. WE have none. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Report Cards November. March, June Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. They come in in translated form from the DOE. 6  Emergency Blue Cards September Curriculum Night September 17 Parent teacher conferences Nov. and March Parent Basketball Parent Surveys Lunch Forms 3x a year March September They are supplied by the DOE Translated notices went out to parents who requested. Translated notices will go out, via "Remind" App. Translated notices will go out, via "Remind" App. They are supplied to us. On-line Ell Summer in the City Program Performances, such as band, chorus, violin Performances, such as chorus, band, and violin, and Art Fair. June They are supplied to us. Throughout the year They will be translated, by "Remind" App. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide PTA Meetings 9/13/18 10/18 11/8 12/20 1/17 2/7 interpretation service(s)? Invitations go out informing parents of the meetings in the requested language. Once we find out which parents will be attending, we use interpreters from our school staff. Presently we have staff who speak the majority of the languages. When necessary, we reach out to the parents to help us. 7  Curriculum Night PTC PTC Family Engagement Night 3/21 4/16 5/16 6/5 9/17 11/15 3/14 1/16 Invitations were sent home in the parent's requested language. Partnership program with S.I. Tech- HS students are translators Tech students come to translate Invitations will be sent home in the parent's requested language. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use our text message system for English. We use school staff members for 5 of the other languages, and we use Translation and Interpretation services for the remaining languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The LAC attends training by Johanna Rivera. The LAC then provides each classroom teacher with a list of parents' preferred languages in oral and written communication. The teachers are provided with the Translation department phone number, and the ENL teacher collaborates with the teachers on using the department's services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage 8   Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS 50 has translated signage visible in our lobby that informs the parents of their rights to receive information in their language. The security guard has a smaller version of those signs listed above to assist the parents. Based on language needs, PS 50 brochures, flyers, and letters will be shared with the parent in their selected language. If a parent requests translation needs, Any parent in the school who needs translation services, we provide either the Translation Unit's services, or we use one of our staff members, who speak the appropriate language. The parents then receive this support during any meeting, phone call, or letter.The office personnel are also notified, so when any communication is distributed, they will send it in the requested language. All current records are updated in ATS, and are readily available. All parents are aware of how to communicate with the school, and how to ask for assistance in their native language. The ESL teacher with the assistance of the Parent Coordinator, informs the staff how to access the Translation and Interpretation Unit. We provide Bilingual flyers on Citywide ELL meetings, and citywide Community Education Council meetings. We also distribute T&I brochures, at the beginning of the school year. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The ENL teacher will create a parent feedback survey that is used, to get, feedback from the parents. The survey will first have to be translated into other languages by using Google Translate, and or staff members. Once completed by parents, the results are kept in the ENL office, and our Language Access Coordinator reviews the responses. 9 
