 31R058 School Name: SPACE SHUTTLE COLUMBIA SCHOOL Principal: MICHAEL LA MORTE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Space Shuttle Columbia School 31R058 353100010058 PK - 5 School Number (DBN): 77 Marsh Avenue Staten Island, NY 10314 718-761-2155 718-761-7384 Phone Number: Michael LaMorte Fax: Email Address: mlamort@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Michael S. LaMorte Dina Galanti Teresa Guastamacchia Margaret Mahoney N/A N/A n/a District Information Geographical District: 31 VincenzaGallassio Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island, NY 10301 Superintendent’s Office Address: VGallas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5657 Phone Number: 718-420-5677 Fax: Staten Island Field Support Center (FSC) Kevin Moran FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island, NY 10301 KMoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-556-8367 Phone Number: 718-391-6109 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Michael LaMorte Dina Galanti Teresa Guastamacchia Angela Gitto Paige Fazio Margaret Mahoney Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Faculty Member/Faculty Member/Faculty-SLT Chairperson   Sara Galvin Yinam Chung BaraZahavi JamiWeber Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview OUR MISSION   We, at PS 58R, The Space Shuttle Columbia School, a school named honoring the memory of seven heroes who gave their lives to promote space exploration, will provide a supportive and intellectually challenging learning environment designed to create lifelong learners who will eventually become productive members of our society. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Space Shuttle Columbia School is an elementary school with nearly 700 students from grade pre- kindergarten through grade 5. The school population comprises 4.90% Black, 25.65% Hispanic, 48.56% White, 18.30% Asian and approximately 3% other students. The student body includes 7.20% English language learners and 25.79% special education students. 53.31% of our students are economically disadvantaged. Boys account for 50.00% of the students enrolled and girls account for 50.00%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 93.70%. With such a diverse population, both cultural and socio-economic, we rely on one another to make each team work collectively by collaborating with one another. The ultimate goal is to inspire and improve the academic and social skill set of our students which composes our P.S. 58 family unit. As a community of learners, we listen and discuss our individual designs to build and scaffold our concepts. This partnership triumvirate of parents, teachers and students, allows us to construct a model where we work together as one. The blueprint for our school model, allows us to become a unit, as partners and team mates in our school community. We respect the opinions of one another and are constantly modifying and shifting our ideas to continually meet the needs of our children and families, here at P.S. 58. We believe that as a team, we will have more success and our P.S. 58 family is committed to achieving our goals and expectations collaboratively. We also a classified as a showcase school for inclusion practices as we truly are barrier-free and a less-restrictive environment for all students with disabilities. This partnership is a thriving one with our D75 program in which we share resources and celebrations throughout the year. This year, 2018-19, we will be offering a collaborative D75/D31 Pre-Kindergarten class. In addition, we have a diverse ELL population(7.2%) with varying degrees of language acquisition, emergence and proficiency levels. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Approximately 26% of our students have IEPs and SWD are making marked(5% increase in proficiency) progress in reaching the promotional and proficiency standard in both ELA and Math. We have an ICT class in grades K,1, 3-5 and 2 ICT classes in grade 2. We also have 12:1:1 self-contained classes in grades K-2 and 12:1 self-contained in grades 3-5. We also offer SETSS to those students with needs in Literacy and Math throughout the grades. As a barrier-free building, we encompass a multitude of SWD classifications - Autism, LD, ED, Dyslexia, and Physical Disabilities. Space Shuttle Columbia School has been designated as a showcase school for inclusion practices as we truly are barrier-free and a less-restrictive environment for all students with disabilities. This partnership continues to be a 0  thriving one with our D75 program in which we share resources and celebrations throughout the year. Additionally we have a number of inclusion students who are travelling with our PS 58 classes in various grades. Additionally, we have a diverse ELL population(7.2%) with varying degrees of language acquisition, emergence and proficiency levels. These students encompass diverse languages from various countries. Some of these are Mexico, Russia, China, Ukraine, Pakistan, India, Poland, Bangladesh, Egypt, Kazakhstan, Croatia, Armenia, Jordan, Vietnam, UAE,Nigeria, Morocco, Brazil, and finally, the Philippines. There is a varying degree of language acquisition levels ranging from emergent to commanding. 15% of eligible ELLs who took the ELA state exam were 15% proficient( a 15% increase) and 29% of ELL students eligible to take the state Math exams were 29% proficient(an 8% increase). 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The embodiment of the philosophy encouraging collaborative practice is reflected in a 4 average in ratings for Collaborative Teachers and Trust components in our school’s Framework for Great Schools and Survey Element scores for 2017-18. We also also average 3.5 - 3.6 on our most recent ratings for Supportive Environment and Effective School Leadership components in 2017-18, which are embargoed at this time. As a result of findings from our most recent Quality Review (February 2018) and our Framework for Great Schools (2016-17 School Year) report, we strengthened our rating in subsequent year. We are dedicated to continuing to strengthen ties between school and community vis a vis parent/teacher communication, and will redouble our efforts this year. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R058 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 688 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 74 73 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 54 53 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 53.0% % Attendance Rate 46.2% % Reduced Lunch 6.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 26.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 49.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.75 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 53.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 94% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 78 76 93.7% 6.3% 24.7% 4.9% 17.3% 2.2% 4 0% 8.1 48.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs Assessment and supportive data An analysis of student performance trends, utilizing NYS ELA and Math scores, revealed the following: ELA All Students Year 2015-16 18 2016-17 17 2017-18 13 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 3/4 46 47 53 36 35 33 35 36 35 11 11 18 During the 2018 school year, 53% of all students demonstrated proficiency (3&4) as compared to the 2017 school year 47% of students demonstrating proficiency. This represents a 6% increase in the number of all students achieving proficiency in ELA. In addition, during the 2018 school year 13% of all students achieved a Level 1 as compared to the 2017 school year 17% of all students achieved a Level 1. This represents a 4% decrease in the number of students achieving a Level 1. Students with Disabilities Year 2015-16 46 2016-17 42 2017-18 37 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 3/4 20 19 24 35 39 39 18 17 22 2 2 2 During the 2018 school year, 24% of students with disabilities demonstrated proficiency (3&4) as compared to the 2017 school year 19% of students demonstrating proficiency. This represents a 5% increase in the number of students with disabilities achieving proficiency in ELA. In addition, during the 2018 school year 37% of students with 3  disabilities achieved a Level 1 as compared to the 2017 school year 42% of students with disabilities achieved a Level 1. This represents a 5% decrease in the number of students with disabilities achieving a Level 1. ELL Year 2015-16 53 2016-17 62 2017-18 54 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 3/4 40 38 31 7 0 15 0 0 0 7 0 15 During the 2018 school year, 15% of Limited English Proficient students demonstrated proficiency (3&4) as compared to the 2017 school year, 0% of students demonstrated proficiency. This represents a 15% increase in the number of Limited English Proficient students achieving proficiency in ELA. In addition, during the 2018 school year 54% of Limited English Proficient students achieved a Level 1 as compared to the 2017 school year 62% of Limited English Proficient achieved a Level 1. This represents a 8% decrease in the number of Limited English Proficient students achieving a Level 1. A further analysis of grade level data revealed that during the 2018 school year 50% of students in Grade 3 achieved proficiency in ELA as compared to the 2017 school year with 48% proficiency , which represents a 2% increase in ELA. During the 2018 school year 57% of students in Grade 4 achieved proficiency as compared to 2017 with 43% proficiency, which represents a 14% increase. During the 2018 school year 53% of students in Grade 5 achieved proficiency as compared to 2017 with 50% proficiency, which represents a 3% increase in ELA. Math All Students Year 2015-16 28 2016-17 26 2017-18 23 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 3/4 35 39 48 37 35 29 24 24 31 11 15 17 During the 2018 school year, 48% of all students demonstrated proficiency (3&4) as compared to the 2017 school year with 39% of students demonstrating proficiency. This represents a 9% increase in the number of all students achieving proficiency in Math. In addition, during the 2018 school year 23% of all students achieved a Level 1 as compared to the 2017 school year 26% of all students achieved a Level 1. This represents a 3% decrease in the number of students achieving a Level 1. 4  Students with Disabilities Year 2015-16 33 2016-17 55 2017-18 50 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 3/4 15 14 19 32 31 31 14 9 17 1 5 2 During the 2018 school year, 19% of students with disabilities demonstrated proficiency (3&4) as compared to the 2017 school year 14% of students demonstrating proficiency. This represents a 5% increase in the number of students with disabilities achieving proficiency in Math. In addition, during the 2018 school year 50% of students with disabilities achieved a Level 1 as compared to the 2017 school year 55% of students with disabilities achieved a Level 1. This represents a 5% decrease in the number of students with disabilities achieving a Level 1. ELL Year 2015-16 63 2016-17 50 2017-18 50 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 3/4 13 21 29 25 29 21 13 21 29 0 0 0 During the 2018 school year, 29% of Limited English Proficient students demonstrated proficiency (3&4) as compared to the 2017 school year, 21% of students demonstrated proficiency. This represents a 8% increase in the number of Limited English Proficient students achieving proficiency in Math. In addition, during the 2018 school year 50% of Limited English Proficient students achieved a Level 1 as compared to the 2017 school year 50% of achieved a Level 1. This represents no change in the number of Limited English Proficient students achieving a Level 1. A further analysis of grade level data revealed that during the 2018 school year 56% of students in Grade 3 achieved proficiency as compared to the 2017 school year with 48% proficiency , which represents an 8% increase. During the 2018 school year 49% of students in Grade 4 achieved proficiency as compared to 2017 with 32% proficiency, which represents an increase of 17%. During the 2018 school year 40% of students in Grade 5 achieved proficiency as compared to 2017 with 38% proficiency, which represents a 2% increase. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5  By June 2019, improve overall student achievement in Mathematics in grades 4&5, including ELL/SWD students, in Mathematics by 4% across and within performance levels, as determined and evidenced within results on the Spring 2019 as compared to 2018 results on the New York State Mathematics formal assessments. Additionally, this year's 3rd Grade students will perform 4% better than 3rd Grade students did in 2017-18 NYS State Mathematics Exam. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● All students in Grades K-5 will continue use of the Common Core HMH “Go-Math” program. This is a comprehensive Math program by HMH chosen by school acclamation in 2013. The program features organized essential questions, themes, and scaffolded math instruction. Differentiation and assessment is embedded into the program each week as well. There will be assessments through weekly and unit tests, as well as benchmarking opportunities. The Principal and teachers of Grades K through 5 are planning the management of this program. ● An RTI (“Response-To-Intervention”) Program to assist students who are struggling with grade level tasks is embedded in Go-Math. Small group instruction is provided 3 times per week to students on each grade level that focuses on skills and strategies to assist the students in attaining grade level skills during the school day. ● Differentiated tasks foster high order thinking and achievement in for students on Level 3 and Level 4. Each unit is differentiated to meet the needs of these students. ● Grades 4 and 5 instruction in Math is done through a departmentalized program to ensure mathematical problem solving time on task as well as teacher accountability and dedication to these subjects. * Grades 4 & 5 are departmentalized, and we have revamped the departmentalization for Grade 5 this year to make it similar to last year's model used in Grade 4. This was done to culture a more nurturing Teachers and students September 2018-June 2019 ongoing. Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers Beginning in October 2018 November 2018 - April 2019. 7  environment for 4th & 5th Graders yet opening them up to more "freedom". ● If funding allows, AIS Math will be provided in small group instruction during the school day provided by 2 per-diem teachers. Students are grouped according to a needs assessment in reading and writing. ● Our 12 to 1 Special Education classes will also use Go-Math for their math instruction. Numerous strategies of best practices are employed to meet the differentiated needs of the students. The teachers have a common prep each week and meet with the IEP teacher and Principal to discuss instruction and planning. ● ELL support is provided through a pull out and push in program for literacy. One of the three ENL teachers provides additional content area support to Grade 4 and 5 during Science and Social Studies. Transitional students are given direct ENL support with parental permission. The Title III Program after school provides additional literacy supports on Wednesdays through reading out loud and literacy homework help. On Thursday and Friday sessions, literacy support through culture is fostered to assist student learning. Parents are invited to the Wednesday sessions in order to build literacy in the home that would ultimately improve student achievement. In collaboration with the JCC, parents have an opportunity to receive instruction in improving their English skills. Ongoing Sept. 2018 -June 2019 New for School Year 2018-19 Beginning Oct. 2018 - April 2019. As above and Guidance Counselor Teachers of ENL/SWD and ENL/SWD students September 2018-June 2019 ongoing Teachers of ENL and SWD students, IEP teacher, AP in charge of Special Needs October 2018 - May 2019 8  ● Parent workshops and forums throughout the year to help better inform parents about the importance of rigorous instruction in both ELA and Mathematics and how it leads to college and career readiness. ● Once a month, during a Monday Professional Development session, teachers examine student work in Literacy & Mathematics using protocols and adjust instruction when necessary. Grade level teams will become more familiar with how to look at student work and determine needs that arise and align with the new ESSA. This work will be done in 4 week intervals and will include performance tasks from the Journeys and Go-Math programs. ● During our data work, each class is divided into focus groups for instruction in both ELA and Math. Student progress is monitored during our data inquiry work and instruction is changed as per data results. The Data Team meets twice a month with the goal of tracking and monitoring student progress and performance. ● Our Instructional Teams, in tandem with 100% of classroom teachers, will complete yearly curriculum maps using the ESSA. The Team ensures that cross grade articulation occurs so that instruction in literacy is contiguous. 100% of all grade level teams will complete units of study based on the ESSA and their yearly curriculum maps. ● Literacy & Math Instructional Teams meet bi-monthly to evaluate instruction, curriculum maps and units of study. Team members report to their grade level partners and continue the work on the grade level monthly on Monday Professional Development time. ● The Math Instructional Team, headed by our Principal, in charge of Math, meets with him each month to evaluate instruction and turnkey information gathered from workshops attended by team members. There is also cross grade articulation that ensures that instruction meet student needs. ● Differentiated tasks within the Go Math program foster higher order thinking and achievement in Parents Teachers and Educational Assistants/Paraprofessionals September 2018-June 2019 ongoing September 2018-June 2019 ongoing Principal, APs, Parent Coordinator, Teachers Principal, APs, Teachers, Instructional Team members September 2018 - April 2019. September 2018 - November 2018. September 2018 - May 2019 9  math for students on all levels. Each lesson is differentiated to meet the needs of the students. * 5th Grade students and teachers are using A4All, a citywide initiative to prepare students for the rigors of algebra as the students move to middle school. 3 teachers are in the training phase and will be afforded professional development during the coming school year. Teachers also participated in Summer '18 PD for 12 sessions. * Teachers in grades 2-5 are going to be involved in NTN Mathematics PD as a precursor and aid to employing the A4All initiative. Teachers of 5th Grade Math September 2018 - May 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 ongoing July/August 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 0  Teachers of Math in Grades 4/5 and 2nd & 3rd Grade members of the Math instructional team. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Meetings during the school year to support ESSA, specifically based in Mathematics instruction and ways in which parents can help students in Mathematics. - PTA & PC sponsored activities, bi-monthly at PTA meetings in September 2018, December 2018, February 2019 and April 2019. APs and Principal will work in concordance with parent leadership to plan foci for these activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher Teams- instructional, grade, data Schedule adjustments to facilitate co-planning and data assessment Per-diem and per session funds to facilitate team meetings and outside/inside PD activities Teacher created assessments and program benchmark assessments Purchases of additional materials to facilitate and drive instruction Permit fees for parent meetings in the evening Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 65% of students in grades 3, 4, and 5 will achieve level 3 or 4 math proficiency, as measured by the mid year Go Math benchmark assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) In Grades 3-5 midyear Go-Math benchmarks administered in February will be used to assess progress in Math for mathematical concepts. In addition, data from ELA mid-year HMH Journeys benchmarks will be used to assess capability of students to respond for multiple choice and particularly on extended response questions in mathematics. 1  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? STRENGTHS ● Supportive Environment, especially as reflected in parent survey continues to be very good and is rated highly in most focal value/metrics in the the school's SQR and Framework for Great Schools Report 17-18 ● In our Framework for Great Schools Report- Element Scores 2017-18, our school received four (3) ratings above 3.5 – Collaborative Teachers, Supportive Environment and Trust all components which are crucial to a positive school culture. environment. ● The school received a rating of Proficient for the Area of Celebration – School Culture "A culture of learning that communicates and supports high expectations" on its most recent QR (2018) ● On the school’s 17-18 School Quality Report on the survey questions of safety, 93% of teachers felt that the school was safe for staff and students, substantially higher or on par with district and city averages. ● Continuing with a focus established within our school’s instructional focus, which is culturing student independence in academics, we are moving towards having students taking responsibility in service to school as positive and focal members of our school community of learners. This will increase self-esteem in students. ● School has some pieces in place to promote service to school and the willingness to accept responsibility as a member of the school community. ● Attendance has continued to improve during the last year as it continues to be an area which is more emphasized, monitored and celebrated. ● Students are recognized at school events which celebrate their accomplishments as students. NEEDS ● There has been an upward tick in OORS reports for incidents which involve students engaging in aggressive behaviors (A24,A33). 25 incidents in 2016-17 and 53 incidents in 2017-18. ● There has been a stagnation in inappropriate classroom behavior, as evidenced by the number of guidance/administrative interventions for negative student to student behaviors. In spite of our generally positive rating in this area, we continue to be concerned with the increasing number of students with minor classroom behavioral issues. This is reflected in lowered percentages on the SQR for questions concerning behavior and discipline which average 72 %. 3  * There continues to be an increase in students engaging in electronic modes of intimidation, as reflected by parent outreach to the school to report these incidents – a precursor to incidents of all out cyber-bullying. ● School has some pieces in place to promote service to school and the willingness to accept responsibility as a member of the school community. This initiative needs to grow. ● Students need more avenues to become “service” providers, share their collective voice and be recognized for their accomplishments, both academically and socially. ● Our upper grade students (3-5) should be expected to and should take more of a leadership role at our school. A student government needs to be created. ● “Respect for ALL” can’t only be a week long event, it needs to personify itself at our school so that CR832 incidents become even less frequent, or better yet, eliminated totally at our school. * While attendance has improved from year to year (2016-2017-2018), lateness to school still has not, as far too many students arrive past the 8:00AM start time. This needs to improve. This is measured in lateness records for 2017-18. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of the emphasis on shared responsibility for grades 3-5 students, there will be a 10% decrease in the number of suspensions and incidents, as measured by the 2018-2019 OORS reports, compared to the number of suspensions and incidents, as measured by the 2017-2018 OORS reports. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● School-wide initiative to employ a more "guided discipline" approach to student behaviors. Students September 2018-June 2019 ongoing Administration, Guidance personnel, Teachers, school aides and paraprofessionals Guidance and Administration Guidance Counselor October 2018 - June 2019 Kindness/Compliment Days in Feb 2019, Respect for All week. Entire school community of learners Various months throughout the school year to celebrate ● Create more avenues & opportunities for our students to become respectful, kind and responsible students in all aspects of school life ● Place an emphasis on the students in the upper grades to become our most responsible students with earned privileges * Begin student government and activities related to classroom elections. ● Celebrate Random Acts of Kindness across the school on a consistent basis * Celebrate the accomplishments of our students throughout the school year, both academically and in terms of their positive studentship * Find tangible ways to reward students for positive behaviors and actions in school. * Create a "token economy" to promote more consistent positive behaviors in all students. 5  * School-wide lessons on the importance of acting in safe and secure ways while at school and in nexus with school academic/studentship achievements * Monitor OORS reports on a monthly basis to drive the behavioral initiatives in improving student to student interactions. Ongoing September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Guidance ● Have staff volunteer to encourage leadership opportunities, especially for Fourth & Fifth Graders including SWD & ENL Teachers, Students September 2018-June 2019 ongoing Administration, Guidance, ● Have Guidance Counselor become a key point person in facilitating these activities ● Continue and strengthen the “R-K-R” initiative to foster an even better school environment ● Relevant and “straight up” discussions about bullying of any kind, including cyber-bullying October 2018 ● Encourage parents to volunteer in the school to model the importance of taking active roles in leadership for their children ● Celebrate BOTH parent and student dedication to school service * Encourage parents to make sure students arrive to school "on time" each and every day * Host school safety meeting at "Town Hall" night with guest speaker to inform parents about the pitfalls of social media for children. ● Host a "career day/night" where parents can share the importance of their jobs in our communities. Guidance and outside providers Parent Coordinator, September 2018-June 2019 ongoing Administration, Parent Coordinator Parents Nov. 2018 6  Continue to meet with all constituents of SLT to SLT create and monitor and continually assess "guided discipline" strategies and "non-negotiables" in positive terms for all shareholders to improve overall school climate May 2019 Began June 2017 and ongoing through 2018-19 Administration, teachers, parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Contracts and written notices will be sent home(backpacked) in September 2018 along with terms of understanding of reasons for implementation of the "Schoolwide Behavioral Expectations/Non negotiables" and how the school will promote positive behaviors in the school and community. There will be ongoing assessment of the impact of the guided discipline initiative by SLT bi-monthly at meetings. We will also host two PTA symposiums concerning behavioral strategies for parents at home with our Guidance Counselor. In addition, there will be ongoing monitoring by all constituents throughout the school year. In addition, school staff will conduct ongoing assessment of all incidents which violate the discipline code and discuss the target needs, individuals, populations and areas where incidents mostly occur. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Parent Coordinator * Teachers, including the attendance teacher ● Funds for celebrations with student volunteers throughout the year ● Guidance Counselor ● Funds for possible trainings ● Schedule modifications * Administration participation, especially to celebrate positive behaviors. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 10% decrease in the number of suspensions and incidents, as measured by the OORS report for the period of September 2018 to February 2019, compared to the number of suspensions and incidents, as measured by the OORS report for the period of September 2017 to February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Decreased percentage of 10% in student to student incidents involving infractions A24 & A33 in OORS as compared to the previous year 2016-17. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS ● In the school report School Quality Guide/Framework for Great Schools (2017-18), in the section “Collaborative Teachers”, the school received an overall metric score of 3.63. * 2017-18 School Quality Guide results reflect percentages in the high 90s for aspects "Cultural Awareness & Inclusive Classroom Instruction"(95%),Peer Collaboration"(92%) and "School Commitment"(95%). ● In the school’s most recent QR(2018), school received a proficient reading for indicator 4.2, teacher teams and leadership development ● The school also rates a metric score of 3.76 in “Trust” on the School Quality Guide/Framework for Great Schools Report, thus leading to a climate where decisions are made in the spirit of collegiality and collaborative transparency to benefit students. * Teachers in Danielson Domain 2, particularly 2a & 2d continued to be predominantly rated "Highly Effective" in 2017-18 school year. * The school raised its overall NYS Mathematics scores in 2017 an average of over 9% for student growth from the previous year, from 39% to 48% proficient(levels 3&4) * ELL students were 15% proficient(levels 3&4) on the Spring '18 NYS Mathematics Exam - an increase of 15% over the previous year. NEEDS ● .Teachers are sometimes hesitant to celebrate and share their successes in instructional practice in Mathematics with their colleagues. There are some teachers who have had greater success in math as reflected in NYS math scores and although scores increased 9%, we can continue to enhance our sharing of effective practice in Math.. * Progressions, such as those used in ELA need to be continuous as a practice to assist students' understanding and assessment of their grasp of mathematical concepts. * Teachers need to continue to foster an openness to peer inter-visitation - both in our school and outside of it to observe and glean ideas to self-assess and enhance their own instructional practice. In our most recent SQR, only 57% of teachers felt that we reached outside our school to see professional practice in other schools, particularly in Mathematics. 9  * Teachers need to continue to employ the practice of "doing" Math as opposed to just writing Math. Our most recent scores reflect that students across the board have greater understanding of mathematical concepts, which dictates that we need to teach those concepts using manipulatives and everyday practical situations in which math is used. This is reflected in NYS Math scores in Grades 3 & 4 as opposed to Grade 5. * Teachers need to continue to understand that allegiance to a program doesn't mean we "fit the students to the program", but rather "fit the program to student" needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of collaborative work triangulated in Data, Instructional and Impact teams, and professional development in how to better interpret data trends to drive instructional practice, 58% of students in Grades 3-5, including ELL/SWD will achieve grade-level literacy proficiency in reading as reflected in NYS State assessments administered in Spring 2019. This is a 5% increase over the previous year. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Teacher teams will continue to refine inquiry-based protocols for collaborative and productive work in grade level teams, instructional teams and data inquiry teams, this will include injecting AIS initiatives to work with students in Grades 2&3(teacher recommendation), 4 & 5 who are level 1 & 2 in Reading as reflected in the Spring 2018 ELA exam and students who are borderline 2/3 in Mathematics * Teachers will continue use formative assessment techniques to continually assess student understanding and progress in all academic disciplines and particularly mathematics. * Teachers and data impact team will pore over item skills analyses from data collected from the Spring 2018 NYS ELA exam to identify student needs to drive instructional practice in Grades 4 & 5. Administration will monitor to help steer instructional practices in the classroom. ● Teachers will continue to collaborate in order to plan instruction and modify curriculum maps for ELA & mathematics instruction and create a "reteach" component for these curriculum maps. * Professional Development time will be built in to assist teachers in collaborative planning, horizontally and vertically across grades in the subject of ELA. ● During the data impact team meetings, members will continue to evaluate student performance, identify Teachers September 2018-June 2019 ongoing Teachers, data specialist, SETSS teacher,administration September 2018 - May 2019. Administrators Teachers Students Teachers, Data Team members Teachers Sept. - April 2019. Sept. - Nov. 2018. Teachers, Data Team, Administrators Administrators, Teachers 1  instructional strategies and monitor trends by comparing data from formative, benchmark and formal assessments. ● The instructional team in ELA will continue to survey progress of the HMH Journeys program to continue to identify best practices and offer suggestions which will create more linkage amongst grade levels and culture greater vertical success, in specific terms in ELA. * There will be "instructional walks which are non-evaluative, in order to provide teachers an opportunity to observe colleagues' professional practice and to debrief to culture stronger cohesiveness in ELA-Reading/Writing instruction. * For Grades K-2, a Universal Literacy coach will provide guidance and instructional assistance to staff to help promote improved reading skills in our students as the navigate the early grades. Teachers Data Team ELA instructional Team Sept 2018 -June 2019 ongoing Administrators Monthly 2018-19 school year Once a month from Oct. 2018 - May 2019 Administrators Teachers, Administrators Oct. 2018-May 2019 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administrators Administrators, Teachers Universal Literacy Coach Teachers & Administrators 2 ● Collaboratively review the performance in ELA and Math extende responses of SWD’s, At Risk students, ENLs and other students will have special needs to identify areas for instructional change Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Data specialist, Teachers of SWD, ELL, SETSS and IEP teacher ● ENL, ICT and self-contained special education teachers will collaborate with classroom teachers to identify effective classroom strategies, including push-in, pull out and in ELL, the assigning of ELL teachers to particular grade levels. ● Implement the use of different types of resources, including technology to help provide targeted instruction ongoing ● Provide translation services and books to help non-English speaking parents help their children at home Parents, Teachers ● Maximize use of Tuesday Parent Engagement time to assist parents in understanding instructional trends and specific topics their children are learning ● Maintain an “open door” policy to help parents help their children understand concepts and achieve, in the HMH Journeys program. Administration, Parent Coordinator, Teachers September 2018-June 2019 ongoing 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administrators, Teachers and Guidance personnel are key people in family engagement activities. Amongst these activities are group and individual meetings with parents scheduled throughout the school year to assist parents with homework help - October PTA meeting, understanding the ESSA standards in ELA - January PTA meeting, Responding to extended Math problems for ELL learners and parents - March PTA meeting and Title III parent meetings for our ELLs in September & November. Also, parent engagement activities via celebrations of subject areas like math are across grade levels and are ongoing throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Teacher team protocols for all teams to foster an effective instructional planning environment ● PD resources to assist all shareholders in the ongoing assessment of the "Go-Math" program in all grades, especially Grades 3-5 3  ● Use of time for team meetings, sometimes hiring per-diem or paying per-session after school ● Parent Coordinator and possible different modes of outreach & communication ● Translation services for parents  Time for all involved to facilitate the ongoing progress of "Go-Math" and for all student learners to cull success Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Data and analysis from the Journeys mid-year benchmarks will reveal a 3% increase in predicted proficiency in students in Grades 3-5 in ELA ● There will be collation of the ongoing analysis of parent attendance at outreach activities designed to promote reading activities in the home. This will be in a likert scale(1-4) format. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. There will be an increase of 3% progress of all students in Grades 3-5 in ELA as reflected in the mid-year Journeys benchmark when compared to the baseline administered in late September 2018. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS  In the School Quality Guide/Framework for Great Schools Report(2017-18), school received strong area designation in “Collaborative Teachers"” in the indicators of cultural awareness & inclusive classroom instruction, school committment and peer collaboration - all in the 90+ %tile according to school survey 2018.. * In the School Quality Guide/Framework for Great Schools Report(2017-18), school received a metric score of 3.76 in the component "Trust", which exceeds both district & citywide averages vis a vis parent ratings. ● The Principal's most recent PPR (2018), Principal reflected a rating of "Well Developed" in the areas "Resource Allocation" and "Learning Environment". ● On the school’s most recent Quality Review(2018), school was rated proficient in indicators 1.4(Positive Learning Environment) and 3.4(High Expectations), which are rooted in the Danielson Framework. * Teachers in the school had ratings which averaged "Highly Effective" in the Danielson Framework components 2a and 2d during the 2017-18 school year. NEEDS ● According to the most recent QR (2018), there are inconsistencies in assessment and engagement-key components of Danielson Domain 3. School is "developing" in alignment and coherence of assessment tools, even though assessment is evident throughout the classrooms, it is scattered. ● Feedback to teachers, while within the allotted time frame, should be even more timely, especially with those teachers who are at the "lower" end of the “Effective” scale. * Teachers scored lowest in three Danielson components on MOTP Advance ratings in 2017-18. Three of these are in Domain 3 3b(3.15), 3c(3.29), and 3d(3.30). * Administration feels the need to re-calibrate in order to more efficiently and effectively rate teaching practice, specifically in Danielson Domains 2, specifically 2d & 3, specifically 3c and how they complement each other going forward in School Year 2018-19. 5  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 90 % of all teachers will receive end of year MOTP ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in Danielson Framework for Teaching component 3d, as measured by 2018-2019 end of year MOTP ratings in Advance. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● School leaders will continue to stay calibrated in working within the parameters and critical attributes outlined in the MOTP and Advance systems as they pertain to the Danielson Framework, specifically in Domain 3d * School leaders will continue to facilitate time for teacher inter-visitations and instructional walks during the school day. * School leaders will continue to create non-evaluative "frozen zones" to encourage inter-visitation & sharing of best instructional practices amongst teaching staff. ● School leaders will develop schedules for observations and the provision of feedback in a consistent time-bound way. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, APs, Instructional Teams, Teachers Teachers September 2018 October 2018-May 2019 October 2018-May 2019 7  ● School leaders will conduct formative walk-throughs determine the impact of feedback to teaching staff ● Teachers will be provided with Professional Development opportunities and resources to help address their self- identified and administrator identified needs ● School leaders will foster a climate of collegial inter-visitation amongst teaching staff September/October 2018 October 2018 - May 2019 ● Observations and feedback will address the needs of SWD, At-Risk and ENL students and work as a more cohesive team to address their needs. Teachers GE, ENL & SWD, Educational Assistants/Paraprofessionals October 2018 - June 2019 ongoing October 2018-May 2019- ongoing Administration & key team teachers ● Professional Development will address the subjects of differentiation of instruction and how to adapt lessons to students of differing ability levels ● Facilitate information for parents on school-wide instructional goals and initiatives and provide information on how parents can help their children at home to foster continued inclusiveness for parents. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents October/November 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Administration, Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Various workshops & meetings with parents monthly throughout the year facilitated by school leadership and the Parent Coordinator in concert with the SLT and PTA to foster a continued relationship that parent voices are heard vis-a-vis improvement of classroom assessments and how they influence instructional practices. Examples of this are Title III parent outreach/educational activities offered during Tuesday Parent Engagement time, Curricular activities focused on instruction at PTA meetings, Parent and community activities for SWD sponsored by DOE and hosted at 8  our school. Staff members for all learners, ELL, SWD, and GE will be involved in these activities, both instructional and engagement activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Funding for PD opportunities offered outside the school plant * Focused in-house PD Mondays designed to improve instructional practice in Danielson Domain 3 ● Parent Coordinator ● Per Diem subs to facilitate PD during the school day * Use of subs to facilitate instructional walks and time for teacher to teacher feedback. ● Schedule modifications to allow for inter-visitation amongst staff members and outside of the school Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 90 % of all teachers will receive at least 2 MOTP ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in Danielson Framework for Teaching component 3d, as measured by Advance observation reports for the period of September 2018 to February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MOTP ratings in Danielson 3D for staff will be employed to gauge and reflect effective to highly effective practice in this component. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. COMPREHENSIVE ASSESSMENT In our school’s School Quality Guide/Framework for Great Schools(2016-17) report, an area of least proficiency identified was in the area of “Strong Family & Community Ties” overall 3.29. In the 2017-18 FGS report, the school improved to a 3.64 rating. We continue to make efforts in collaborating with the community of learners to use guided discipline techniques to improve our supportive environment rating, which on the survey was rated at 3.62, marginal improvement over the previous year. We continue to assess, and share with members of SLT, parents and staff to identify areas of need and continue to employ co-created, positively worded "non-negotiables" for all in order to improve overall environment.This continued effort is designed to bring all partners together to improve an identified school climate need. STRENGTHS/WEAKNESSES ● Strength – through the efforts of our Parent Coordinator, school is the only one in the district with 98-100 percent parent return of surveys for the past five school years. We have been lauded by central for our exemplary efforts in completing this task. ● Strength-our School Quality Guide/Framework for Great Schools report for 2017-2018 reflects that 95% of parents have trust in the Principal. ● Strength – in measuring trust on the "Framework for Great Schools" report (2017-18), all of the percentages were calculated at or higher than 88%. ● Strength – on the school’s most recent Quality Review report from 2018, the school received a proficient reading for the area of Positive Learning Environment, which was also the Area of Celebration ● Strength-on our most recent SQR(2017-18), 96% of parents are satisfied with the education that their child has received ● Weakness – Attendance at PTA meetings, though they reach quorum, have a low rate of attendance. ● Weakness – at a percentage of 75% on the School Quality Report, parents felt that they were asked or had the opportunity to volunteer at the school, which is 10-15% lower than the responses for other questions about parent involvement in school. * Weakness- parents felt that there was a need for more extra-curricular activities as reflected in an 80% positive rating on the 2017-18 survey - 20% or one-fifth did not feel enough opportunities were offered. 0  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of all parents will attend at least one school function, in addition to parent teacher conferences, as measured by the 2018-2019 Parent Coordinator Activity Report (PCAR). 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Coordinator, Teachers, School Administration ● Continue to structure Tuesday extended day activities so that teachers can actively contact parents. These contacts will be logged. Parents ● Parent Coordinator will be an active participant in professional development activities concerning outreach having to do with Common Core(new ESSA) curricular activities and the concept of college and career readiness. ● Parent Coordinator will be a focal point in conducting workshops revolving around parent understanding of the concept of college and career readiness. ● Provide parents with modes for fluid conversations with staff throughout the year. ● Continue to conduct activities which involve curriculum initiatives throughout the school year. * Guidance Counselor will continue to spearhead activities with students centered on career education, investigation and selection, specifically in the upper grades. * Guidance Counselor and other staff will engage parents in the importance of participation in activities and workshops involving college and career readiness. ● Continue to keep an open door policy when parents feel the necessity to speak school staff about a variety of issues involving school environment and curriculum. ● Continue to emphasize the use of the new school website and social media tools as vehicles for parent information. ● Continue to “push” the Remind 101 text messaging service that the parent coordinator has used during the past school year to disseminate information. September 2018 – June 2019 ongoing November 2018-March 2019 Sept2018 - June 2019-ongoing April-May 2019 Nov. 2018 - March 2019 2 Sept. 2018-June 2019 - ongoing Oct. 2018- June 2019 - ongoing ● Parents of special needs and ENL students will continue to be provided with information, services and strategies appropriate for their child’s specific needs. Parents, students with special needs, ENL students September 2018-June 2019-ongoing Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, teachers and service providers ● Parents of ENL students will continue to be provided with ENL specific information, such as after school opportunities, Title III programs and adult ENL classes for better language acquisition. * School has employed the use of IO/Skedula/Pupil Path as a tool to keep parents informed of student progress in the classroom throughout the 2018-19 school year for all students, inclusive of ELL and SWD. * School will continue to promote electronic means of communication for parents to assist them in becoming more comfortable with the use of these modes of communication. ● Continue to foster the high element of trust already in place for all shareholders in the school ● Capacity Framework element of trust is continually addressed through positive interaction amongst teachers, parents, support staff and administration Parents, teachers, administrators and guidance counselors September 2018-June 2019 - ongoing Parents, teachers, administration, guidance counselors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Schedule times for workshops, after school, and evening activities designed to be informative for parents about instruction, Common Core and college and career readiness ● Per session funding to cover teachers who are offering workshops outside of school hours 3  ● Maximizing time and effort of the Parent Coordinator who will be involved in many aspects of this initiative ● Human Resources, in addition to the Parent Coordinator include teachers, guidance counselor, administration ● PTA to assist in engaging more parents become tuned in to these workshops and to provide refreshments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 60% of all parents will attend at least one school function, in addition to parent teacher conferences, as measured by the Parent Coordinator Activity Report (PCAR) for the period of September 2018 to February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Parent Coordinator Activity Report (PCAR) will be the instrument used to measure progress in this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Lowest Third on NYSELAexam(4&5) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group Instruction During the school day, After school & Pull out services Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Re-teaching strategies, Finish Line, Great Leaps, Stars& Cars Universal Literacy coach contact Struggling Readers in Gr K-2 Mathematics Science Social Studies Lowest Third & Cusp 2-3 on State Math Exam(4&5) Re-teaching strategies, Buckle Down, Great Source, Finish Line N/A N/A N/a N/A Small Group Instruction & Pull out services N/A N/A During the school day, After school N/A N/A At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Lowest Third and struggling students as evidenced by teacher classroom observation and formative assessment Small group counseling, At Risk counseling, At Risk SETSS Pull out and Push in, During the school day Tiered interventions 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $0 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 8  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 9  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Space Shuttle Columbia School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Space Shuttle Columbia School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 1  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Space Shuttle Columbia School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 3  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 4  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 5  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 6  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our title 3 funds provide for an afterschool program that is open to all ELL students in grades K-5. Presently we have 50 students that are currently receiving ENL services and will participate in the program. This number does not include our Commanding students receiving 2 additional years of ENL support. One certified ENL teacher will work every Wednesday and Thursday and 2 ENL teachers will work Friday that school is in session. After reviewing the results of 2018 NYSITELL and NYSESLAT we decided to organize our Title 3 program as follows: Our 3rd, 4th and 5th grade students will be invited to attend Wednesday session that will be under the direction of Mrs. DelVecchio our ENL teacher. The program will run from 2.20-4.30 every Wednesday school is in session. This group will focus on academic intervention. An engaging novel, There Is a Boy in a Girls’ Bathroom by Louis Sachar will be chosen for the students to participate in shared and guided reading experiences. The ENL teacher will be responsible for providing thought questions that facilitate accountable talk and discourse. As a result of this program the students will develop their BICS and CALP language. They will also continue to work on the development of their reading skills such as predictions, character traits, comparing and contrasting, inferencing, retelling etc. The students will make connections to and examine themes such as bullying, friendship, and changing yourself to be a better person. The activities for our reading will focus and develop all four modalities: listening, speaking, reading and writing. In addition to read-aloud activities the students in those grades will focus on test sophistication. The workbook “Essential Skills for Reading Success” will be utilized to instruct the students in various readings and strategies. The book is designed to teach the students the fourteen skills and strategies they need to become successful readers. Each skill is taught through implementation of modelling by a teacher, guided instruction and independent practice. This part of the program is being introduced due to the results of our ELA and NYSESLAT scores. Our data shows that most of our ENL students received scores of Levels 1 and 2, and we are intended to reteach the skills and strategies necessary for achieving higher scores on the exams in a smaller group setting. Also students in above mentioned grades will attend a Social studies curriculum oriented tour provided by Circle Line Cruises, located in midtown of NYC. This tour guide ensures that exploring is never boring and geared to students’ interests and age levels. Students will experience views and narration of landmarks, modern and historic sites, NYC bridges and the Statue of Liberty which will tie in with the Social Studies Unit we will explore in the program about New York City. Based on the 2018 NYSESLAT results, a majority of our second grade students scored in the transitioning stage of language development and will attend the afterschool program on Thursday under the supervision and instruction of Mrs. DelVecchio. This group will run from 2:20- 4:30 every Thursday that school is in session. This group will focus on phonics interventions in order to improve their reading and writing skills. The students will also work on the development of their reading skills through guided and shares reading activities of Charlotte’s Web, by E.B White. The ENL teacher will be responsible for providing thorough questions that facilitate accountable talk and discourse. Students will be able to make text-to-text and text-to-self connections when examining Wilbur and Fern’s friendship. These students will continue to work on their reading skills such as predictions, character traits, compare and contrast, inferencing, retelling, etc. They will explore such themes as determination and resilience. 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Kindergarten and 1st grade students will participate in the program on Fridays. The program for these grades will be under the direction of our two ENL teachers Mrs. DelVecchio and Mrs. Raskin. The program will run from 2.20-4.30. Based on our NYSITELL/NYSESLAT results, 58% of our kindergarten and first grade students scored at the entering, emerging and transitioning levels. In order to meet the needs of those students our program will focus on the development of their listening, speaking and reading skills as well as a variety of hands on activities. We will be utilizing various developmentally appropriate read alouds throughout the program in order to enhance students’ language and vocabulary development. Students will also participate in different hands on activities including arts and crafts, math problem solving and scientific experiments. We will explore various themes during the course of the program such as circus arts, animals and sea creatures in order to provide the students with a meaningful culminating activity in the form of a trip to the Zoo/Aquarium so they can make connections with what they learned throughout the year. Involvement with the community is an integral part of the Title 3 program. Free and low cost community programs and resources will be included in PS 58’s plan. Some of the resources that we plan to include are: The NY Public Library, The NYPD, The FDNY, The New York Department of Sanitation as well as local theater companies. These organizations and the programs they offer will provide hands-on learning on topics such as Community Helpers, Careers, Recycling, Animals, and Nature etc. Parents will be invited to those programs and field trips in order to build family literacy and parental involvement. Our program was designed after reviewing the needs of our ESL population. The ENL team of our school looked at the population and evaluated the need based on the test scores and parental feedback. Last year after the program was completed the teachers spoke to many of the ELL the parents in order to gain the understanding of their needs and wants. After reviewing their input we were able to develop our Title 3 plans taking into consideration the feedback we received from the parents. They indicated an overwhelming desire for test sophistication which we included into our plans. It was also mentioned that both parents and children enjoy project based learning activities that encompass content areas and enrichment. Therefore in the 2018-2019 school year, the Title 3 program will continue test sophistication and project based learning activities. GRADE ENTERING EMERGING TRANSITIONING EXPANDING TOTALS K 2 2 2 2 8 1 2 6 8 16 2 1 1 6 4 12 3 7 7 4 3 3 5 1 3 4 Total: 50 students 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Throughout the year our teachers who are responsible for delivering instruction and services to limited English proficient students attend numerous professional developments that cover a variety of topics. Two such workshops will be held over the summer. They are provided by the NYC Department of Education. They are facilitated by Enrique Domingo by the Field Support Center of Staten Island. The first workshop will be attended by Mrs. Olga Raskin. She will be attending the SIOP, Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol. She will be attending this workshop August 27, 28, and 29th. One of her duties will be examining how language is used in the content classroom and use examples for writing language objectives and strengthening student skills. She will then turnkey this information for staff during the course of our school year. The second workshop will be attended by Mrs. Mary DelVecchio. She will be attending the TOM, the Targets of Measurement workshop on August 30, 2018. She will practice techniques that will strengthen student’s academic vocabulary, oral language and discussion skills, to improve content area reading and writing using the Targets of Measurements. She will then turnkey this information for staff during the course of the school year. Also, as part of Title 3 budget is dedicated to the professional development, our ENL teacher Olga Raskin, will conduct a series of per session PDs to classroom teachers in Grades K,1, and 2 in SIOP on the following Wednesdays from 3.30-4.40 October 24th – Introduction to SIOP. Component 1 (Planning) November 7th – SIOP component 2 (Building background) November 14th – SIOP components 3-4 (Comprehensible Input, Strategies) November 28th – SIOP components 5-6 (Interactions, Practice and Application) December 5th –SIOP components 7-8 (Lesson Delivery and Assessment) Every year our professional development plan is to provide ongoing instruction to all staff on using ENL strategies within all phases of their teaching. The professional development is based upon the needs of our students and the levels we intend for them to achieve. The ENL teachers are constantly checking in with their Field Support office in order to obtain relevant and updated information pertaining to their ELL student population. Classroom teacher are invited to ENL related workshops that provide them with valuable and useful resources in order for them to differentiate instruction for those students who are yet to achieve a higher level of English language proficiency. 1  Part C: Professional Development Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent involvement, including parents of ELL’s is a priority at PS 58. We encourage parental participation and offer a variety of cultural relevant activities for parents during school and after school hours. It is our belief that students have greater success with parental support, therefore we strive to strengthen the home/school relationship. P.S. 58 accomplishes this goal by giving parents the opportunities to be involved in the activities, trips and various classroom experiences. Additionally, we make parents partners in their child’s educational process. Parental engagement activities will encourage and educate all parents about the significance of involvement in their child’s education. Throughout the year P.S. 58 has various activities, events, workshops, meetings and celebrations that incorporate parental involvement. This year every grade will host a parent engagement activity for the arts and music. In addition the whole school participate in the Nights for the Arts during which all of the parents and caretakers are invited to visit the school and observe their child’s art work and on stage performance. Parent engagement workshops also take place on the regular basis, on Tuesday afternoons during parent engagement time. They cover topics such as Testing Strategies, The Successful Child, Preparing for Parent Teacher Conference, Understanding Your Child’s Report Card, Science Project Preparation, How to Use the Library and many more. Parents are encouraged to attend those informational workshops given by the classroom teachers. Additionally out parent coordinator offers and hosts multiple events that involve and engage parents. Through the use of the school data analysis and the feedback from the parent survey, ENL parents requested additional support and services. As a result, P.S. 58 collaborated with the local Jewish Community Center providing ENL classes to all of our ELL parents. This is our eleventh year providing this parent activity. Our group meets twice a week on Mondays and Wednesdays from 8.30 to 10.30 at P.S. 58. This venture is under the guidance of our parent coordinator. In addition to English lesson, the instructor covers important social information that assists these families in the community. We continue with this workshop since it provides a wonderful opportunity for those parents and empowers them to ultimately assist their children in school and in the community. Additionally, P>S 58 partners with other agencies and Community Based Organizations to provide workshops and services to ELL parents. Schoolwide family events are also held throughout the school year. This includes but not limited to ELL families. Events such as Evening of the Arts starring our Celestial Chorus, award ceremonies, author celebrations, class plays and shows, The March of Dimes Walk, The P.S. 58 carnival, annual dance festival and Bedtime Story Night encourage parents to be hands on throughout every activity, strengthen family bond while increasing the involvement in their 2  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities child’s academic affairs to make their school experiences successful, meaningful and memorable. In addition to all of these endeavors, we hosted a five week parent engagement activity exclusive for ELL students and their parents. We plan to continue this in 2018-2019 school year also. P.S. 58 and the ENL teachers were the recipients of a Parent Engagement Grant. This was funded through the Office of Arts and Special Projects by the NYC Department of Education. We worked with Marquis Studios this year. The residency we chose this year for our parental involvement was “Circus Arts” during which parents and students participated in fun activities such as: balancing, juggling, tight rope walking, and improvising. We will choose a different workshop through with Marquis Studios for the upcoming school year in order to engage and involve our ELL parents and students in a meaningful, fun and interactive activity. Parents are typically notified of all the activities through written letters in both English and their home language. In addition when more clarification is needed we call the parents utilizing the translation unit during parent/teacher conferences. This helps parents feel more comfortable and confident while communication with the school. Additionally we have our school website, http://www.ps58sscolumbia.org/ which is available for all of the parents. This provides parents with a schedule of upcoming events, gives them an opportunity to visit their child’s class page and read important school information. There is link on a web page that can be used for translation to their home language. Parent engagement workshop with Marquis Studios. ENL teachers Mrs. DelVecchio and Mrs. Raskin alongside with Marquis Studios resident will meet on the following dates: April 5th, April 12th, May 3rd, May 10th and May 17th 2019. These workshops will take place from 2.20- 4.00 pm. Schedule and duration of the parent engagement activities will be as follows: Fri, April 5th (2.20-4.00) – Introduction to circus arts and different types of clown characters Fri, April 12th (2.20-4.00) – examining and introducing basic skills of Circus Arts Fri, May 3rd (2.20-4.00) – Juggling and balancing Fri, May 10th (2.20-4.00) – Miming and improvisation Fri, May 17 (2.20-4.00) - Culminating activity Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $7421.00  Per session  Per diem Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. The Title III After School Program will employ 2 ENL certified teachers from October 2018 through May 2019 every Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday. Wednesday- Friday Sessions- 2 hours x 60 sessions x $61.00. 3  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount $1236.00 $2473.00 Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other $0.00 $0 $1236.00 (parent engagement) TOTAL $12,366 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Wednesday PD series - 4 teachers x 5 hr. x $61.00 Staten Island Zoo - Kindergarten ENL class (25 students) + 3 students from 12:1:1 class + 5 teachers Meet and Greet educational class $200.00 Brooklyn Aquarium Trip for grades 1 & 2. $400.00 Guided Tour of the aquarium for the 1st grade class $200.00. Fins and Feathers educational class for 2nd grade class $200.00 N/A N/A Circle Line Cruise 20 students +20 parents + 4 teachers = 44 people X $15 pp = $660.00 End of Year - Culmination activity allotted budget 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name Space Shuttle Columbia School Borough Staten Island School Number 058 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Michael LaMorte Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mary DelVecchio Briana Castela Teacher/Subject Area Stacey Cohen/ Library Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Jessica Errico/SETTS Teacher Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal Maggi Mahoney, Joseph Luisi Coach School Counselor Deana Guarella Parent Teresa Guastamacchia Parent Coordinator Sherri Donders Field Support Center Staff Member Enrico Domingo Other (Name and Title) Teresa Guastamacchia, PTA Pres C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2.6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 5  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 689 Total number of ELLs 62 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.00% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At PS 58 the assessment tools used to assess the literacy skills of our ELLs are the Teachers College Assessment Pro, and MOSL NYC Performance Assessment ELA. The Teachers College Assessment Pro assesses the students’ reading level and comprehension in all grades. According to the Teachers College Assessment Pro, the literacy skills of our ELLs are as follows: This % indicates students that are not on reading grade level: •Kindergarten- 73% •First grade- 57% •Second grade- 28% •Third grade-50% 6  •Fourth grade-50% •Fifth grade-25% This data indicates that we must concentrate on reading skills and comprehension within the ENL and general classrooms. This will be done with the use of Guided Reading materials, Journeys reading program, graphic organizers, visual aids, and attending and turn-keying professional development workshops such as “Effective Strategies in Literacy Instruction for ELLs.” The MOSL NYC Performance Assessments are also used to gauge the literacy skills of students. They will be used to monitor student growth. To assess the mathematical skills of our ELL students, our teachers use the Go Math program. Teachers administer the beginning of the year assessment as outlined in the Go Math program. Chapter and unit assessments are administered frequently to assess students’ knowledge of each chapter. Additionally, the end of the year assessment is administered. Furthermore, P.S.58 has benchmark assessments. They are typically given in September and January. The results indicate that ELLs are below grade level in mathematics. ELLs need to be further supported through the use of visual aids, manipulatives, small group differentiation, and intervention programs such as, SETTS and AIS. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To support this effort, we will continue to concentrate on the following skills: •Kindergarten- a focus in grammar, usage, phonics, and writing production is necessary •First grade- a focus in conventions of standard English, print concepts, key ideas and details, and text types and purposes is essential •Second grade- a focus on grammar, usage, reading understanding informational texts, key ideas and details, and text types and purposes is needed •Third grade-a focus on the main idea of a text; recount the key details and explain how they support the main idea, and academic and domain-specific words and phrases in a text is vital •Fourth grade-a focus on the overall structure (e.g., chronology, comparison, cause/effect, problem/solution) of events, ideas, concepts, or information in a text or part of a text, and using precise language and domain-specific vocabulary to inform about or explain the topic is important •Fifth grade-a focus of two or more main ideas of a text and explain how they are supported by key details; summarize the text is necessary We will use these findings to guide our instruction of ELLs. Furthermore, we have instructional rounds in which all classroom teachers on grade participate in this program. During this time, all teachers in the particular grade will observe a lesson from their peers. Other teachers on grade are present, along with the administration. The team observes the lesson for about 20 minutes and moves to a separate location to debrief. During the debriefing period, teachers will be giving positive feedback and constructive criticism. The administrative role is 100% non evaluative. They are facilitating the teachers to support instructional planning. In addition, teachers have weekly grade meetings to share resources. This ensures ongoing instructional planning efforts between colleagues and administration. We have two instructional teams—literacy and mathematics. One teacher on every grade is represented in the team. Every month, instructional teams meet with an administrator to assess instructional strategies, analyze and review data, and support instructional planning efforts 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 7  Every year we evaluate the success of our ENL programs. We determine the success of our ENL program by looking at a combination of things. One factor is the Annually Yearly Progress (AYP). As per the 2016-2017 report, PS 58 met their AYP in all areas. Another large factor in determining the success of our ENL program is the scores on all of the New York State Achievement tests. These tests include the NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, and Science exams. In the lower grades, we also analyze student report card grades, Teachers' College assessments, and MOSL NYC Performance Assessments. We analyze the trends and patterns of our ELL students' performance. This analysis helps P.S.58 to examine how the ELL students are succeeding in school. It helps us to determine whether programs that are in place should be continued, altered, or discontinued. This data analysis also helps us to drive our instruction and programming. We particularly scrutinize the NYSESLAT results, as this test assesses ELL growth in the four modalities of English language learning. As per our current NYSESLAT scores we have on record, 34 students took the NYSESLAT and 5 students passed. Although only 14% of our population scored at Commanding level, the majority of our ELLs were able to show growth by moving towards higher proficiency levels 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ELLs are included in all our support programs at P.S.58. This includes but not limited to, Academic Intervention Support (AIS) for mathematics and literacy, Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETTS), parent teacher conferences, and one-on-one meetings. These interventions consist of the support teacher working with students in small group settings to reinforce skills that still fall below grade level. Once the summative assessments have been gathered and recorded, we are able to determine what students know and do not know. Therefore, this drives our instruction. The classroom teacher and the ENL teacher collaborate and examine particular ELLs. As a result of the data, through classroom notes and teacher observations the pair (ENL teacher and content area teacher) continues to scrutinize, modify, and differentiate the instruction for students. They are able to determine the area of students’ strengths and needs. Furthermore, students are encouraged to self-assess and contribute to drive their own instruction. They are able to use different tools in the classroom to continue to evaluate themselves and aid in the process of growth. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At PS 58, we incorporate high quality evidence-based instruction for all ELLs and follow the RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs. Our instruction is based on the results of the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, the ELL Periodic Assessment, as well as periodic classroom assessments that are given throughout the year. These assessments provide evidence of the students' abilities across the four ENL modalities: Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing. We continue to use a strong core (Tier 1) Instruction for all students. Tier 1 is the instructional core that is intended to incorporate high quality evidence-based instruction for all students. This includes instruction that has been shown to be effective for ELLs, and differentiation to meet students’ diverse needs. In order to achieve this, all classroom teachers implement the following principles when teaching rigorous academic content: Teachers and Students Producing Together; Developing Language and Literacy Across the Curriculum; Making Lessons Meaningful; Teaching Complex Thinking; and Teaching through Conversation. Students move into Tier 2 and Tier 3 if they demonstrate a need for more targeted and intensive academic support. This extra support can occur in the classroom, but also in separate settings with instruction focused on specific learning targets. Tier 2 and Tier 3 instruction should also be tailored to meet ELLs language needs and should be incorporated into research-based intervention strategies. There are many factors that influence the language learning process and corresponding academic development. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We received NYSESLAT scores in the beginning of September 2017. These scores generate our upcoming ELL program for the 2017-2018 school-year. We analyzed the data and grouped the students according to their proficiency levels. This year the results indicate that 14% of our ELLs scored at the Commanding level. According to the RLAT data, it shows that students struggle most with reading comprehension and writing modalities. In moving forward, the ENL teacher will continue to scaffold 8  lessons designed to improve these areas of need. Additionally, we use the EDAT (ELL Data Analysis Tool) to evaluate and analyze our ELL program on the areas students need support in. This tool focuses on the progress toward achievement of proficiency for specific subgroups of ELLs. Factors that can be analyzed through the use of the EDAT include home language, grade level, NYSESLAT proficiency and progress, # of years in ENL, and ELA and Math performance. Therefore, the EDAT is used to collaborate with teachers to plan lessons, enhance student learning, and create goals. Using the EDAT has proven to be successful. The data helps drive instruction and small group interventions based on different factors listed in the EDAT. . 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data is reviewed in the spring to determine class reorganization. All the students are grouped according to their English proficiency. In September, the data is reviewed again to ensure that students are receiving the mandated number of minutes for stand-alone and integrated ENL services. In order to make programmatic adjustments that may occur, ENL teachers meet with an administrator to verify data, class rosters, and ENL specialist reports. Furthermore, at the beginning of the year, the ENL teachers host a meeting with the school administration and staff to review the NYSESLAT data. During this time, each member of our professional staff receives a copy of the RLAT and EDAT to evaluate the results of their ELL students. ENL teachers and support teachers circulate the meeting and conference with teachers to initiate this endeavor of examining data and further driving instruction to meet ELLs’ needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S.58 provides 2 full time ENL specialists, and one part time ENL teacher for three days a week servicing grades K-5. We currently have 62 ELLs in various proficiency levels. This year P.S. 58 reorganized homerooms to meet the new CR Part 154 mandates. Our ENL teacher, Ms. Castelao, will provide integrated and standalone ENL services for kindergarten, first grade, and second grade. Our ENL teacher, Mrs. DelVecchio, will provide integrated and standalone services for second grade, third grade, and fourth grade. Our part time ENL teacher, Mrs. Raskin, will provide integrated and standalone services for fifth grade. According to the NYSESLAT results, this determines your proficiency level, number of minutes of mandated ENL instruction, and the type of instruction you receive. Our entering and emerging students receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL instruction, 180 minutes of integrated ENL instruction. All Transitioning students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction, and 90 minutes of flexible ENL instruction. All Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL services. All Commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction. For students receiving standalone instruction, all students are grouped by grade level. Currently we have two groups of standalone instruction that include kindergarten students that are entering, emerging, and transitioning levels. Our second group includes fourth and fifth grade students that are entering and emerging. During standalone instruction, the ENL teacher provides students with listening, speaking, reading, and writing instruction that includes ENL strategies, and language acquisition to foster English proficiency. During integrated instruction, the ENL teacher co-teaches with the classroom/content area teacher. They plan and collaborate with each other to provide ENL strategies and methodologies to their lessons. b. TBE program. If applicable. 9  Currently P.S. 58 does not have a TBE program according to the needs of our Parent Survey Program Selection form. If the parent surveys indicate a desire for this program, we will revisit this possibility. c. DL program. If applicable. Currently P.S. 58 does not have a DL program according to the needs of our Parent Survey Program Selection form. If the parent surverys indicate a desire for this program, we will revisit this possibility. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teachers at P.S. 58 adhere to the guidelines outlined by the CR Part 154. Our ELL students that scored proficient on the NYSESLAT will receive support services for two additional years of integrated instruction. In addition, ELL's that scored a 3 or a 4 on ELA are now considered proficient and will also receive support services by the ENL teacher for two years. These students will receive at least 90 minutes of integrated ENL, in which the ENL teachers pushes into the content area of ELA, Math, Science, and/or Social Studies. The ELL's that scored Expanding on the NYSESLAT will receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL, where the ENL teacher pushes into the content area of ELA, Math, Science, and/or Social Studies. The ELL's that scored Transitioning on the NYSESLAT will receive 180 minutes of ENL, where the ENL teacher pushes into the content area of ELA, and/or pulls out of the classroom to deliver content area instruction using ENL methodologies. The ELL's that scored Entering or Emerging on the NYSESLAT will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction. Students receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL, where the ENL teacher pushes into the content area of ELA. Students also receive an additional 180 minutes of Standalone ENL instruction. As previously stated, the amount of minutes students receive is a result of their English proficiency level as per their NYSITELL, NYSELSAT, or ELA score. During integrated instruction, the ENL teacher works with the classroom/content area teacher. The ENL teacher co-teaches to deliver ELA instruction while using ENL strategies and methodologies. Standalone is also part of the Freestanding ENL program, which focuses primarily on English language acquisition through ELA instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ENL program is based upon our literacy program. Our ENL teachers use the workshop model in their classroom with their groups. They have Rigby materials, Mondo Guided Reading, a leveled library, and sets of guided readers and novels for our students to use. Teachers and students use a plethora of fiction and non-fiction books that are available in our literacy lending library. PS58 uses the Journeys reading program to service Kindergarten through Fifth grade. This program will also be used in the ENL integrated classrooms. The ENL component reteaches and scaffolds the lessons that are being simultaneously taught in the classroom. Instruction focuses on schema and the development of metacognitive strategies as our children make text-to-self and text-to-world connections. Comprehensible input is provided by the ENL teachers during small group instruction. Some techniques that are used to provide students comprehensible input include but are not limited to: realia, technology, visuals that can be manipulated, and, TPR. The ENL teachers also provide important test preparation for the NYSESLAT with Finish Line New York ELLS Bilingual Common Core. All materials are appropriately selected according to the level of instruction. Writing is published upon completion of a unit of study that includes immersion into literature. The units of study are outlined by the Common Core Learning Standards. The use of graphic organizers and word study enhance the writer's organization and composition. Both strategies are used within the Integrated and Standalone ENL instruction. In addition, conferencing is very important to the individualized assistance given to these students, as well as their progress. Our ENL teachers have focused on writing strategies since the data points to student needs in this area. Co-teaching in the content area is a vital part of the 2017 ENL Program at P.S.58. Academic language is a continuous challenge for ELL's and former ELL's. The ENL teacher provides differentiated instruction when she pushes into the classroom. This 0  instruction includes strategies such as word play, and deconstructing and reconstructing sentences. These strategies are being implemented in order to foster the use of Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP) language. All of the above methods of instruction are designed to enrich language development. In addition, other instructional approaches used to make language and content comprehensible is to determine the students’ proficiency level. Once this is ascertained, for our entering and emerging students we build receptive vocabulary with picture support, simplify and modify content vocabulary to the student’s level, use a variety of graphic organizers, charts, graphs, provide diagrams students can label, and provide listening activities when possible. For our transitioning students, we provide decodable texts that students are able to phonetically sound out. If the text is too lengthy, the ENL teacher will provide strategies to chunk the text. Other approaches used for ELLs in the transitioning stage is to provide vocabulary flashcards for content subjects with definitions, illustrations, and vocabulary word in their native language, provide teacher explanations with visual and nonverbal cues, and no more than two step directions. For our expanding ELLs, we provide vocabulary previews with definitions before teaching new content, make connections with material previously taught, and connect with the students’ prior knowledge. In addition, we incorporate technology and provide ready references students can access quickly, such as multiplication charts, spelling lists, sight word charts, etc. Lastly, our commanding ELLs still need support in content areas and in writing. Vocabulary is still vital at this stage, therefore we provide multiple non-fiction sources and texts for research purposes, continue to allow “study buddies” when possible for writing projects and research, provide charts, graphs, organizers, and templates with word banks. All instruction is delivered in English, however students are encouraged to speak with friends in their native language. Students utilize the iPads to clarify vocabulary with Google Translate. These approaches and methods are specific for each students’ proficiency level to make language and content comprehensible. In order to meet the demands of NYS Learning Standards, teachers will continue to infuse ENL instructional approaches. Furthermore, teachers will receive ongoing professional development and work with ENL specialists to strengthen their ENL approaches and methodologies. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At P.S.58, the NYS Math exams are given to Spanish, Chinese, Russian, and Korean students in English and their corresponding languages in order to evaluate the students ability in mathematics. At this current time, NYS does not offer this test in other languages. Students who speak languages other than English are also permitted to use a bilingual dictionary during the administration of the NYS Math and science exams. ELLs are evaluated with the Spanish LAB-R if they are a native Spanish speaker. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status At P.S. 58 we differentiated for all ELL subgroups. a.) SIFE students as defined by the NYC DOE are students with interrupted formal education. These students tend to lack a base in literacy and therefore struggle in the classroom. They require intensive instruction that will develop their reading and comprehension skills. We currently do not have any SIFE students however, we would implement such a program should the need arise. In the event if we have a SIFE student, we would consider the following factors: low or no literacy skills in any language, behind in content knowledge for their age, complex social and psychological needs due to traumatic migration experiences, frustrations with their academic delays in relation to their peers, and a lack of familiarity with school culture. As listed in the EPRG, there is a SIFE Identification Process. This includes NYSED oral interview questionnaire, NYSED multilingual 1  literacy SIFE screener, and writing screener. All resources, tools, and descriptions are available on NYSED website. b.) Many of our Newcomer ELLs are in the lower grades (K,1,2). These students receive ENL instruction that focuses on a variety of themes. These themes are selected by the classroom teacher and ENL teacher after observing the language the students are not familiar with. All modalities are a focus within these themes as students are encouraged to listen, speak, read, and write. Songs, chants, repetition, and rhymes are an integral part of newcomer instruction. These help lower the affective filter and cultivate risk-taking within their language development and expression. Some of our newcomers are in the upper grades and therefore required by NCLB to take the ELA after one year in the country. In these cases the child is given extra support by being invited to the Title III Program where small group test preparation takes place. The Newcomers for grades 3-5 are also instructed using a thematic approach. Themes are chooses according to grade level and interest level. Materials used particularly for the newcomers are Rigby On Our Way to English, and Hampton Brown Into English. Picture files/ cards and bilingual dictionaries are also a tool used in the general classroom. Classroom teachers also pair newcomer ELL's with another child who speaks their home language in order to assist the child with their transition. Testing accommodations for newcomers in grades 3, 4, and 5 are as follows: If the student is here for less than one year, he/she is exempt from the NYS ELA. For the NYS Math test, ELLs also have the option to take the test in their home language. In order to differentiate instruction for Newcomer ELLs, we initiate the following approaches in all core content classes: • Uses manipulative, visuals, realia, props, games • Create climate of acceptance/respect that supports acculturation • Use cooperative learning groups • Require physical response to check comprehension • Display print to support oral language • Model activities for students’ • Use hands-on activities • Use bilingual students as peer helpers • Adjust rate of speech to enhance comprehension • Ask yes/no questions • Ask students to show/point/draw • Teach content area vocabulary/terminology c.) Developing ELLs typically have a strong BICS foundation. According to Dr. Lily Wong Fillmore, ELLs in this stage are more comfortable, and not as focused on language, form, and function. During the time, students are comfortable with social language while the academic language becomes increasingly difficult. This comfort zone leads the student to be less focused on language, meaning, and use across content areas. This knowledge proves that BICS and CALP must be taught simultaneously. They will benefit from intensive reading comprehension and vocabulary instruction. This type of instruction is a primary focus in the instruction of Developing ELLs in the ENL model. PS58 uses Journeys reading program for all grades Kindergarten through Fifth grade. This program has a special ELL component that is being utilized by the ENL teacher in conjunction with the classroom teacher. The ENL teacher also provides support and differentiation within the workshop model when she pushes in for Integrated ENL. They use graphic organizers and deconstructing and reconstructing sentences. Testing accommodations for Developing ELLs is as follows: They are required to take all state tests, and receive unlimited time. They also have the option to take the NYS Math test in their home language. d.) Long Term ELLs are defined by the NYC DOE as those children who have completed 6 or more years of services. We currently do not have any Long term ELLs at our school. If we did, he/she would be placed in the ENL group with other students at his/her grade level. Additional support such as ENL Enrichment, or the Title III After School Program will also be offered. Testing accommodations for Long Term ELLs is as follows: They are required to take all state tests, and receive unlimited time. They also have the option to take the NYS Math test in their home language. e.) Former ELLs are those students who have scored proficient on the NYSESLAT. Former ELLs are also those students who have scored a 3 or 4 on the ELA. These children will continue to receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction as per CR-Part 154 for two years after they become proficient. Certified ENL teachers push-in to the classrooms of the former ELLs and 2  coteach with the classroom teacher in the content areas of reading, writing, math, science and/or social studies. Lessons are scaffolded and differentiated as needed based on the needs of the students. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs with special needs exist in the ELL program at P.S.58. These children are grouped according to proficiency and grade level. Many of our special needs ELLs have paraprofessionals, some who are bilingual, who assist within their classroom and ENL program. The ENL teachers become familiar with their needs by reading their IEP's and conversing with their classroom teachers. These needs are taken into account when planning and differentiating with the use of materials such as Reading Basics, and Right Into Reading as well as the use of Wilson strategies, small group instruction and clarifying vocabulary. Additionally, all self-contained special education classes are using the Journeys reading program to meet the diverse needs of their students. Their special education teachers also incorporate ENL strategies into their lesson. The materials currently used to enable our ELL-SWD to achieve their goals are Key Links to Literacy, Essential Skills for Reading Success, and the Journeys Literacy Program. These materials help to accelerate English Language acquisition as these materials include multiple opportunities for speaking, listening, reading, and writing. The Journeys Program has an ENL component with specially designed ENL leveled readers, ENL strategies, and ENL prompts. The ENL teachers also use clarifying bookmarks obtained from QTELL workshops. These bookmarks provide a visual prompt that help the student either ask a question or summarize what they have just read. The ENL teachers chunk the reading passage as necessary so as to provide continual comprehensible input. The ENL teachers cover a wide array of strategies such as: finding the main idea, supporting details, sequence of events, compare and contrast, and analyzing context cues. Specific instructional strategies and grade-level materials to support ELLs-SWDs with academic content and language acquisition include small group instruction, guided reading groups, the use of realia, guided bookmarks to facilitate listening and speaking, and reading comprehension anchor charts to develop key literacy skills. In addition, we use IEP goals and feedback from the special education teacher to drive instruction. This helps the ENL teacher create language objectives as per the students’ IEP. Technology is also utilized in all classrooms. Laptops and Smartboards are consistently used to enhance and strengthen teacher lessons. Ipads are utilized in the ENL classroom and also during the Title III After School Program. Students and parents can utilize RAZ Kids reading library and Achieve 3000 units in the ENL classrooms. Parents are sent home notification and login information about these available resources. Furthermore, there is also a Spanish component to these program. Additional apps such as, Flash to English, Read on Sight, Sentence Maker, Reading Monster, and ABC Magic are also utilized in centers in the classrooms. Engaging read alouds, Key Links to Literacy, and Essential Skills to Reading are used for all of our subgroups for ELL-SWD students. Depending on the level of their proficiency, materials will be scaffolded in order for the students to obtain mastery. Specific instructional strategies for ELL-SWD students include, but are not limited to: use of their first language, turn and talk opportunities, pairing students with other students that speak the same language, providing wait time, frequent checks for comprehension, and providing comprehensible input. Native language materials are also used for our ELL-SWD students. The ENL teachers have a bilingual lending library. We currently have books available in Urdu, Spanish, Arabic, Korean, Russian, Polish, Chinese, and Albanian. The children are encouraged to take out books so they can have a shared reading experience with their peers or parents. The ENL teachers also utilize their ipads when they are delivering Standalone ENL or integrated ENL instruction. The ENL teacher is able to use 3  translation via the ipad to provide immediate clarification to any student during the lesson. P.S. 58 ensures that all ELL-SWDs receive all mandated services on their IEP. Margaret Mahoney, our assistant principal, and Katie Riviello, our IEP teacher oversee all matters related to ELL-SWDs. The teachers of all special needs students, including those that are ENL, are required to read the IEP of all the students that they service. The service providers at P.S. 58 collaborate and meet at the beginning of the year to ensure that all services mandated on their IEPs are met and that schedules don't conflict. If a student has an IEP that states ENL services they are then placed in the appropriate ENL Program. They are instructed for the number of minutes mandated by their proficiency level. Our IEP teacher reviews all IEPs to ensure that our students are receiving their services. Those ELL-SWDs that have bilingual instruction on their IEP will be assisted by a bilingual paraprofessional that will be with them throughout the day. They will be facilitate all of their translation needs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All of our ELL students with disabilities are placed within the least restrictive environments as are all students with disabilities at P.S. 58. Students are evaluated by PPT teams regularly to determine which services are needed, and which placement is best for the child. ELL students with disabilities are placed in all types of classes: general education, mainstream classes, ICT classes, and self-contained special education classes. These students are also eligible for all services necessary. Our ENL teachers are complying with the mandates outlined in CR-Part 154. Therefore, if a student requires integrated ENL services, the ENL pushes-in and co-teaches in the student’s particular setting. Our Assistant Principal, M. Mahoney, facilitates a scheduled meeting with all services providers to ensure students with an IEP get their full amount of services mandated. Teachers are able to collaborate and execute a schedule to service the students for their mandated interventions. These services may include ENL, SETTS, AIS, Speech, Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, Counseling, Adaptive Physical Education, and Hearing. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers meet regularly to discuss student progress. For students that are placed into ICT classes or self-contained using the following process is completed: a student is brought up for discussion at a PPT meeting, RTI intervention is initiated, and progress is monitored and recorded for future consideration. If the student does not make gains, they are then referred for a special education evaluation. The results of the evaluation are then discussed at a meeting with the parents, ENL teachers, classroom teacher, school based support team, our IEP teacher and/or special education supervisor. At this meeting the proper placement for the student is discussed and decided. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At P.S.58 we have interventions in place to meet the needs of struggling ELLs in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies. These interventions include SETTS program, the AIS program, and differentiated instructional groups. ELL subgroups that are targeted include Newcomers and ELLs who have received 4 to 6 years of ELL instruction receive these interventions. The SETTS teacher instructs in ELA and Math using the Wilson program, Go Math, Foundations and reading comprehension strategies. The AIS program is for those students who are currently below grade level or at risk. AIS groups this year focused on Math interventions. Mrs. Stumacher works with students in grades 2-3 who are at risk, including ELLs. Mrs. Stranges works with students in grades 4-5 who are at risk, including ELLs. Intervention is provided by creating comprehensible input, scaffolding, the use of graphic organizers and vocabulary instruction. The students' needs are assessed in ELA and Math and they are grouped accordingly. Each subgroup works with a small group of students that have similar needs. The aforementioned services are delivered in English; however, native language materials are made available to the students in order to support native language arts. 4  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? According to our NYSESLAT results, 13 student out of 41 students achieved English proficiency. This data concludes that 31.7% of students passed, however 46% of those students were in kindergarten, and 30% of those students were in first grade. These results indicate that our lower grades showed a much higher percentage of mastery. When going forward, we will make a very conscious effort to close the achievement gap in the upper grades, while sustaining the progress we have achieved thus far. These trends indicate new programs that will be implemented for our third, fourth, and fifth grade ELL students. The programs includes small group instruction with reading comprehension skills and writing strategies. Additionally, the ENL Program will follow a similar format for the 2017-2018 school year, as per the new CR Part 154. The ENL teachers will provide Integrated and Standalone ENL instruction. The program will follow the format that we had in the previous two years. Most of our ELL students score within the Expanding or Commanding proficiency range. Therefore, most of our program consists of Integrated ENL approach. We will also continue with the Title III after school program for the ELL's and proficient ELL's. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We did not have a bilingual program this year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL's are included in every aspect of the school, both curricular and extracurricular. All opportunities available at P.S. 58 are extended to our ELL's. This invitation is sent in English and their native language. All of our ELL's participate in the regular physical education, art, science and technology lessons and project based learning. PS58 has worked alongside Marquis Studios for eleven years. Marquis has provided workshops to meet the needs of all of our students. Being a longstanding Marquis Studios member, they have provided P.S.58 with various residences such as, Puppetry, Circus Arts, Creative Movement, Dance on Broadway, Latin American Percussion, Music and Rhythm, Music and Abstract Art, and Science through Sculpture and Painting. Each year there are multiple showcases topped by our annual Arts Day where student work in both performing arts and visual arts are proudly displayed to the assembled parents. This year, the ENL teachers wrote a grant for the ELL's to be able to participate in an exciting circus production. This will be collaboration with Marquis Studios. This will exclusive to our ELL's and students with disabilities. We are hopeful to be the recipients of this grant. All ELLs in Kindergarten through Fifth grade are included in Enrichment Clusters program. This program allows the students to select a topic/theme they are interested to partake in for ten weeks. Some choices include photography, broadcasting, gardening, travel, and cooking. Furthermore, the third, fourth, and fifth grade students also have the opportunity to participate in a Song Writing/Chorus Program. There are no activities that occur at P.S. 58 in which the ELL students are not invited to. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL program includes many instructional materials. The materials include The New York City Edition Science textbook (Harcourt School publisher), Rigby On Our Way to English, Hampton-Brown Into English, Primary Source for social studies, Buckle Down Social Studies, Social Studies New York City (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt), Journeys Literacy Program, as well as Finishline New York ELL Bilingual Common Core NYSESLAT test preparation books. These materials are used regularly to support ELLs. We also employ various technology within the ENL and general education classrooms. Elmo projectors and Smart Boards are used to enhance the learning experience and engage all learners. Within the library program, children are exposed to sites such as PebbleGo, BrainPop, BookFlix, OneMoreStory, and the Tumble Book Library that allow them to interact with language. 5  These sites are regularly used at PS58, and are an excellent literacy tool for students to use. Ipads are also a new addition to the ENL classroom. They are used by the students in various ways including research, and listening to books. The Raz Kids online program is used in order to support leveled reading instruction and also has a wonderful Spanish component. Additionally, we use Achieve 3000 online reading program. Achieve 3000 Program helps drive student instruction through listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Student work can be checked any time by a teacher login. The teacher can view each individual student’s progress. There is an item skill analysis and summary skills on reading objectives that allows the teacher to check student strengths, needs, and revise their next assignment. Also, the item skill analysis itemizes each question and skill, such as identifying main idea, recalling fact and details, analyzing character, plot and setting, drawing conclusions, and making inferences. This drives the ENL teachers’ instruction by delivering the same grade-appropriate lesson to the entire class, yet is differentiated to the precise needs of each individual student. These instructional materials for literacy and content area are used to support all subgroups of ELLs. The ENL and content area teachers go beyond the standard program to deliver appropriate instruction that fits the needs of all students, including entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding. Finally, native language materials are also a part of education at PS 58. Bilingual dictionaries are used to assist Newcomer ELLs with their Speaking, Listening, Reading and Writing skills. A bilingual library is maintained in the ENL classrooms for all ELLs to use. The library contains books published by Mantra Lingua in the following languages: Spanish, Russian, Chinese, Korean, Polish, Urdu, Arabic, and Albanian. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered in the ENL program model in a number of ways. The ENL classroom has a bilingual library from Attanasio that is available to all our ELL's. This library includes books in Arabic, Albanian, Russian, Polish, Urdu, Chinese, Korean, and Spanish. These books are intended for the ELL children to share with their families. The school library also has bilingual books available for the children to share at home. Many teachers also use the website, BookFlix, which has books in Spanish. Bilingual dictionaries in Spanish, Polish, Russian, and Korean have also become a part of our ENL library as well as classroom libraries. Another method is pairing students with another child who speaks their native language during “Think-Pair-Share" time and collaborative work. ENL teachers, classroom teachers, the Parent Coordinator and Administrators all make use of the bilingual staff and the DOE Translation Unit regularly when communicating with and contacting ELL parents. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELL support and resources at PS 58 are aligned with ELLs age and grade levels. The curriculum is adhered to and not diluted within the ENL program. According to CR Part 154, we ensure that students receive mandated minutes based on their proficiency level. This mandate requires the standalone program does not span more than two consecutive grades. For example, we cannot have a student in second grade and a student fifth in the same standalone group. Although, we can have a student in second and third grade in the same standalone group. Additionally, if a student has an IEP, we make sure students are getting all services and supports that are stated. Reading, writing, and content area lessons are scaffolded and infused with ENL strategies in order to make content comprehensible. Teachers receive ongoing professional development on ENL strategies, and integrate graphic organizers, word play, deconstructing and reconstructing sentences, and clarifying into all learning. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? PS58 shares a space with District 75. District 75 is responsible for servicing their special needs and ELL students; therefore we do not currently service any of their ELLs. We currently do not share resources with District 75. Our administration and teachers at PS58 are responsible for ensuring all ELL academic, linguistic, and social/emotional needs are met. Therefore, District 75 administrators, teachers, and support personal are responsible for ensuring their students’ needs. However, we 6  include District 75 students in many of the activities that PS58 participates in. For example, students are invited to all assemblies, student performances, dance festivals, and the end of year celebration. We coordinate efforts facilitated by our Assistant Principal, M. Mahoney, in which we share many common spaces in the school. This includes but is not limited to: student cafeteria, teacher’s lounge, school yard, gymnasium, and auditorium. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist our newcomer ELL students prior to the first day of school, the ENL teachers distribute a number of materials to assist the children and their families during the summer months. They give each child a journal to write in, a summer skills workbook, booklists of suggested reading, and lists of events in the area. Journals and workbooks are encouraged to be brought back to school in September to share with their peers. These materials will be used in the ENL classrooms at the beginning of the year as a part of our “Getting to Know You” activities. If the ELLs return these workbooks and journals they are invited to an ice cream party in September as a reward for their hard work. Additionally, our Parent Coordinator, S. Donders, works alongside the ENL teachers to provide communication between the ELL families and teachers. This can be done using the NYC Translation Unit, and sending home notes/letters in the parents preferred language. The guidance counselor, D. Guarella, attends many of the ENL meetings for ELL families and students. She connects families to outside community agencies, and provides at risk counseling if need be. Additionally, she hosts many events. One of these events consist of a fifth grade trip hosted at the neighboring intermediate schools: I.S.75 and I.S.72. This prepares students that will be transitioning into middle school. During this time, students attend an assembly that is conducted by a school administer. Students also get a tour of the school, and get to meet-andgreet with students to ask questions. In order to support the ELLs and their families as they transition to middle school, our staff ensures a smooth and successful transition for them. Our assistant principal, J. Luisi and our guidance counselor, D. Guarella, are two key members that make this endeavor a success. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? P.S.58 does not have language electives in such a way as Intermediate School may. However, we do maintain a language program in collaboration with Susan Wagner Highschool students. These students come to P.S.58 weekly to lead lessons that teach our students basic Spanish, Italian and French. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not currently have a dual language program at PS 58. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 7  All ELL personnel at PS58 participate in training on the implementation of the NYSESLAT and its significance. In the 2017-2018 school year, the ENL teachers will receive a minimum of 50% the required professional development hours that are ELL-specific. These hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction. This includes a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. All other teachers (including all teachers of ELLs) will receive a minimum of 15% the required professional development hours that are ELL-specific. We always place high priority on attending all of the ELL professional development that is made available by the Network and our Cohort. Throughout the year our teachers who are responsible for delivering instruction and services to limited English proficient students attend numerous professional developments that cover a variety of topics. The ENL staff is included in all content area professional development so as to coordinate activities with the classroom teachers and provide continuity of instruction.The scheduled Monday PD periods include the following staff: Assistant Principals, Common Branches Teachers, Paraprofessionals, ENL teachers, Guidance Counselors, Special Education teachers, and Speech Therapists. The following is the upcoming 2017-2018 Professional Development schedule: October 2, 2017 at 2:40: Sensitivity Training. Presenter: Deana Guarella—Guidance Counselor October 16, 2017 at 2:40: Developing Language Objectives and Success Criteria for ELLs: Presenter: Mary DelVecchio & Briana Castelao-ENL Teachers November 6, 2017 at 2:40: Introduction to the Language Line/DOE Written Translation Unit Presenter: Mary DelVecchio—ENL teacher December 4, 2017 at 2:40: Continuing to make our Classrooms Cohesive/Learning Intentions and Success Criteria/Integrating Teaching Models Presenters: Jessica Errico and Natalie Nowrocki—Kindergarten ICT teachers January 8, 2018 at 2:40: Using Blooms Taxonomy to Develop Effective Learning Intentions and How It Will Be Adapted for ELLs. Presenter: Michael LaMorte—Principal February 5, 2018 at 2:40: Autism Spectrum Disorder/De-escalation/Support for Teachers of ELLs. Presenter: Jessica Errico and Lauren Fallon—Special Education teachers March 5, 2018 at 2:40: Intake Process and Interview for the ENL students and parents. Presenter: Mary DelVecchio—ENL teacher and Sherri Donders- Parent Coordinator March 26, 2018 at 2:40: Testing Protocol and Guidelines for NYSESLAT. Presenter: Assistant Principal and Testing Coordinator April 23, 2018 at 2:40: Make content comprehensible for all students (ELLS & SWD). Presenter: Briana Castelao-ENL Teacher and Carla Greenblum-Special Education Teacher May 7, 2018 at 2:40: Research-based instructional strategies. Presenter: Stacey Cohen-Library/Technology Support June 4, 2018 at 2:40: Utilizing Library Resources/Incentives for Summer Reading Programs. Presenter: Stacey Cohen—Library/Media Specialists The listed PDs are a highlight of some of the professional developments that the PS 58 staff participates in, however, this does not capture all of them, as new professional development topics present themselves as the year progresses and other professional developments offered by particular DOE offices arise as the year goes on as well. 8  As it is integral to make the content of the Common Core Learning Standards accessible and comprehensible for ELLs, the ENL staff is included in all content area professional development so as to coordinate activities with the classroom teachers and provide continuity of instruction and focus on the Common Core Learning Standards. In addition to workshops and training on implementing the Common Core Learning Standards, in the 2017-2018 school year, the ENL teachers will receive a minimum of 50% the required professional development hours that are ELL-specific. These hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction. This includes a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. All other teachers (including all teachers of ELLs) will receive a minimum of 15% the required professional development hours. These hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction. This includes a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Professional development to all teachers, including the teachers of ELLs, is typically given to the staff on Professional Development days, and during the Monday Extended Sessions. These professional development workshops are facilitated by administration, the ENL staff or other staff members who have attended workshops with information to turnkey, or sometimes, special guests. Furthermore, our ENL teachers at P.S.58 attends ongoing professional development and meeting presented by Nilda Kraft; Senior ELL Compliance Performance Specialist, Rick Domingo; ELL field work support center, Department of English Language Learners (DELLs) of citywide training, and Regional Bilingual Education - Resource Networks (RBERN). Our staff is encouraged to attend these offerings as they support teaching of ELL students. Our ENL teachers that attend ongoing professional developments are given the opportunity to turnkey new information to other staff and teachers of ELLs at P.S. 58. This will positively support and benefit our English Language Learners as teachers present new strategies and approaches in their classroom learned from attending professional developments. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As it is integral to make the content of the Common Core Learning Standards accessible and comprehensible for ELLs, the ENL staff is included in all content area professional development so as to coordinate activities with the classroom teachers and provide continuity of instruction and focus on the Common Core Learning Standards. In addition to workshops and training on implementing the Common Core Learning Standards, in the 2017-2018 school year, the ENL teachers will receive a minimum of 50% the required professional development hours that are ELL-specific. These hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction. This includes a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. All other teachers (including all teachers of ELLs) will receive a minimum of 15% the required professional development hours. These hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction. This includes a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Professional development to all teachers, including the teachers of ELLs, is typically given to the staff on Professional Development days, and during the Monday Extended Sessions. These professional development workshops are facilitated by administration, the ENL staff or other staff members who have attended workshops with information to turnkey, or sometimes, special guests. Furthermore, our ENL teachers at P.S.58 attends ongoing professional development and meeting presented by Nilda Kraft; Senior ELL Compliance Performance Specialist, Rick Domingo; ELL field work support center, Department of English Language Learners (DELLs) of citywide training, and Regional Bilingual Education - Resource Networks (RBERN). Our staff is encouraged to attend these offerings as they support teaching of ELL students. Our ENL teachers that attend ongoing professional developments are given the opportunity to turnkey new information to other staff and teachers of ELLs at P.S. 58. This will 9  positively support and benefit our English Language Learners as teachers present new strategies and approaches in their classroom learned from attending professional developments. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? As per the ELL Policy Reference Guide, schools must individually meet with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting should include school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English and in the child’s home language in the case of students enrolled in a bilingual education program. Such meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. In order to fulfill this requirement, PS58 will use their "Parent Outreach" Tuesday Extended Sessions. The ENL teachers will reach out indiviudally to all parents of ELLs to arrange an annual meeting to discuss the aforementioned topics. Arrangements will be made to communicate with the parents in the mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. In-house personnel will be utilized for translation/interpretation, as needed. The DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized as well when needed. Records for the annual individual meetings will ELL parents, as well as outreach to ensure parent needs are accommodated will be kept in a binder, labeled, "Parent Communication." This binder is kept in the ENL classroom. In this binder the following records will be kept: A log of when parent outreach phone calls were made; Attendance sheets from individual parent meetings; Copies of any written letters sent home; Anecdotal of phone conferences, etc. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent involvement, including parents of ELLs, is a priority at PS 58. Throughout the year, there are various activities, events, workshops, meetings, and celebrations that occur. This year, every grade will host a parent/student breakfast. In previous years, these breakfasts included Daddy Donuts, Making Valentine’s, Thanksgiving crafts and more. Parent Engagement workshops take place monthly that will include topics such as Testing Strategies, The Successful Child, Preparing for Parent-Teacher Conferences, Progress Report Discussions, Science Project Preparation, How to Use the Library, and more. Learning Lunches with parents will also take place and incorporated topics such as Academic Success, Staying Healthy, Diet and Nutrition, Planning for the Future using 529 Plans, State Test Preparations, Speech and Language Intervention, and Becoming Familiar with the IEP. Our Parent Coordinator hosts many events that involve and engage parents. Some of these events include Parent to Parent- Using the Local Services, Parents as Reading Partners, a Cultural Luncheon, and EPIC (Every Person Influences Children). Schoolwide events also include our ELLs such as Night of the Arts, awards ceremonies, author celebrations, class plays and shows, the March of Dimes Walk, the PS 58 Carnival, and Bedtime Story Night. There are also workshops at PS 58 that are just for the ELL parents. Some of these workshops are Meet and Greet the ENL teachers, Program Choices for ELLs, and How to Prepare Your Child for the NYSESLAT. Notices and invitations to the aforementioned events are sent to parents in their native language. The notices and invitations are sent to the DOE Translation Unit for Translation. P.S. 58 also posts these events on their eChalk website which enables parents to translate all information into their home language. In addition, the bilingual staff at P.S 58 is available to help facilitate all formal and informal activities as well when needed. In addition to the parents being included in all the above activities, parents are invited to exclusive ELL related activities. This includes but not limited to: Title III school trip and Title III enrichment program. 0  Furthermore, the ENL teachers collaborated with the parent coordinator to write a grant to involve ELL families. The grant— Office of Arts & Special Projects for Arts and Family Engagement is exclusive for the ELL students and their parents. We were fortunate to be the recipients for this grant money for the 2017-2018 school year. The ENL teachers will be constructing the after school program. They will be partnering with Marquis Studios, and work with their resident artist. Parents will be invited to attend each session with their child. Our ENL teachers will write a newsletter to parents to inform them about this venture. We will utilize the services of the NYC Translation Unit to ensure that all parents receive this exciting news in their native languages. We will provide information to parents at a PTA meeting so we can explain the residency in greater detail. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. No, we've included everything. 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Michael LaMorte, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Space Shuttle Columbia School School DBN: 31R058 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Michael LaMorte Title Principal Maggi Mahoney Assistant Principal Sherri Donders Parent Coordinator Mary DelVecchio ENL/Bilingual Teacher Teresa Guastamacchia Parent Stacey Cohen/ Library Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Deana Guarella School Counselor Rick Domingo Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member District 31 Jessica Errico Other SETTS Teacher Briana Castelao Other ENL Teacher Joseph Luisi Other Assistant Principal Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/26/17 9/26/17 9/26/17 9/26/17 9/26/17 9/26/17 9/26/17 9/26/17 9/26/17 9/26/17 9/26/17 9/26/17 9/26/17 9/26/17 9/26/17 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R058 School Name: Space Shuttle Columbia School Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Sherri Michael Donders LaMorte Parent Coordinator Principal Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When a student enters the New York City Public School System, they complete a Home Identification Language Survey. A trained pedagogue will interview the student and parent. When completing the HILS, the trained pedagogue will ask the parent each of the following questions: 1. 2. In what language would you like to receive written information from the school? In what language would you prefer to communicate orally with school staff? This information in reviewed and inputted into ATS. When disseminating information for our school, this information can be accessed by the RCPL report in ATS. The RCPL report is run to see which parents prefer which language for both oral and written language needs. If oral communication is necessary, the emergency contact card is flagged to alert the person using it that the New York City Translation Unit. This information is shared with 4  all school personnel and helps all those who interact with these families to know what translation needs are required and requested. In PS58's lobby, there is a large poster that has a statement in every language that tells the parents that they are entitled to the translation and interpretation service in order to inform our school community of the accommodations available to them. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. There are no languages that represent at least 10% of our school population, excluding the listed languages. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families September, November, March, May 9/21-9/22, 10/9, 11/7, 1/15, 5/28, 6/7, 6/11, 6/15 11/23-11/24, 12/25-1/1, 2/16-2/23, 3/30-4/6 September translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. NYC DOE Intranet Templates NYC DOE Intranet Templates Parent Teacher Conferences Holidays/Days Off Recess Notifications NYC Code of Discipline ELL Parent Orientation 5  Parent Survey and Selection Form Title III Invitation Graduation Dates Report Cards Individualized Educational Plan (IEP) ELL/ELA/MATH Summer School Apply for Lunch Safety Health Concerns Latchkey notices September September October June Nov., March, June Anytime Required June June Anytime October/June NYC DOE Intranet Templates NYC DOE Office of ELLs NYC DOE Office of ELLs NYC DOE Office of ELLs Translation Unit Translation Unit Pupil Path Translation Unit NYC DOE NYC DOE Translation Unit Translation Unit 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 6  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent Teacher Conferences Intake Process and Registration Procedures IEP Meetings Phone Conferences/Impromptu Calls to Parents September, November, March, May Anytime Anytime Anytime plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Bilingual Educational Assistants are encouraged to sign-up for per session work for the evening conferences. Languages that are spoken by school personal include: Arabic, Chinese, Russian, Polish, and Spanish. Additionally, we utilize the NYC Translation Unit during these conferences. The ENL teachers and trained pedagogues utilize the NYC Translation Unit for all languages spoken other than English. Bilingual Educational Assistants 7  are present during the meeting. If the personal is not available for the family’s particular language, we will utilize the NYC Translation Unit. NYC Translation Unit 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In September, there is a Professional Development meeting with the LAC Coordinator and ENL Teachers. During this conference, they inform all school personal of our communication strategy in the event of an emergency. There are two scenarios that can occur: 1. If an emergency occurs when school is not in session, we communicate through Blackboard Connect/phone blasts. This system is linked to ATS and is activated by R. Aiani and/or M. LaMorte. This phone message is sent out to all teachers, and families at PS58. This message is sent out to everyone in English. Our LAC Coordinator, S. Donders, then reviews the RAPL and communicates the same message orally with parents in their preferred language. If an emergency occurs when school is in session, we immediately evacuate the building. The teachers carry red emergency folders as the class evacuates. There is a spot in the folder that indicates students in their class that request a language other than English for communication. The teacher contacts the LEP parents using their cellphone. The NYC DOE Translation Unit is previously stored in their contact list. Therefore, they are able to immediately communicate to parents that speak a language other than English. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 8  Training of field staff is critical for the success of the Department of Education’s language access initiatives. Training on the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 is done during Professional Development in September. The primary LAC, S. Donders, host training for the professional staff at PS58. During this training session, she provides information on the following:  The school’s role in facilitating the provision of Language Access services  Accessing translation and over-the-phone interpretation services from the Translation and Interpretation Unit  Obtaining translated signs for posting and Language Identification Cards for identifying parent’s primary language  Resources and support available from the T & I unit Over-the-phone cards are distributed to all teachers to help them in the steps to obtain an interpreter if needed. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In PS 58's lobby there is a large poster that has a statement in every language that tells the parents that they are entitled to the Translation and Interpretation Services provided by New York City. A notice in every language is also distributed to all students/parents informing them of this service. These measures are taken in order to inform our school community of the accommodations available to them. A binder with the A663 regulation is on display in the General Office for reference and use on a daily basis. Furthermore, our LAC Coordinator copies and distributes “I-Speak” cards to all teaching staff. These are individual cards that teachers have on display during parent teacher conferences. The cards identify the language that parents prefer to communicate. During this time, teachers are able to assist in meeting their language needs. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We currently do not have a survey to gather feedback. As a result of this plan, our LAC Coordinator, S. Donders, will be developing a survey for parents. We will send this to translation so we can better meet the needs of our LEP parents. This survey will capture the parents’ feedback regarding the translation and interpretation services provided at P.S. 58. 9 
