2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 31R061 School Name: I.S. 061 WILLIAM A MORRIS Principal: SUSAN TRONOLONE 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 718-727-8481 Phone Number: Section 1: School Information Page School Information William A. Morris I.S. 061 31R061 353100010061 6-8 School Number (DBN): 445 Castleton Avenue, Staten Island, NY 10301 718-447-2112 Fax: Heather Fernandez HHeal@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Susan L. Tronolone Patricia Mezzacappa Adrienne Wiatrak Heather Fernandez SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Antonio Bennet N/A Ilene Pappert Geographical District: 31 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Anthony Lodico Superintendent: 715 Ocean TerraceBldg A, Room 200, Staten Island, NY 10301 ALodico@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5667 Phone Number: 718-420-5667 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Staten Island (District 31) FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: Kevin Moran Petrides Complex, Staten Island, NY 10301 KMoran@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-374-4252 Phone Number: 718-420-5667 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Susan L. Tronolone Patricia Mezzacappa Adrienne Wiatrak Antonio Bennet N/A N/A N/A Heather Heal Alex Teryek Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable SLTChairperson Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Tara Esser Jennifer Lawson Tatiana Todman Jennifer ArmitageLawson NyameameMcGhie N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The William A. Morris, I.S. 61 community is committed to middle level reform that is responsive to the developmental needs of adolescents. We are dedicated to affirming the importance of school, parent and community to enhance our learning environment. Our school population closely reflects the rich cultural diversity of New York City as a whole. With a student population that is racially, ethnically and socio-economically diverse, we seek to engage students actively in their learning and promote respect for differences. We are dedicated to creating a learning environment that develops the whole child, including his or her self-esteem and sense of personal worth, while providing opportunities for students to own their learning, as they engage in a rigorous learning experience.  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our special programs include an Integrated Algebra and Living Environment Regents program. The Magnet program offers innovative instruction in the schools of Dance, Strings, Winds, Choral Music, Journalism, Visual Arts, Stage Craft and Theatre Arts, which is in alignment with the Blueprint for the Arts. The Morris Leaders Club promotes leadership and community service. Intramural sports teams are available, as well as a variety of after school clubs, STEM activities and tutoring programs, which target specific needs of our students. To further student achievement we have partnerships with Staten Island Mental Health, Museum of Modern Art, Goodhue Center, SI Institute of Arts & Science, JCC and St. John's University, New York Foundling, Carnegie Hall, Staten Island Tech, Project Power and our Mentoring Program link our students to a variety of community leaders. Also, our school is part of the Chancellor's Learning Partner Program initiative, which allows us the opportunity to share best practices with community, as well as city-wide school programs. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school has made the most progress and will continue to strengthen in the area of Collaborative Teachers as outlined in the Framework for Great Schools. In our math department, the lead teacher, in tandem with the department supervisor has continued to implement a Lesson Plan study in which teachers work collaboratively and conduct inter-visitations in order to improve mathematical practices to build capacity within their department. In addition, we have implemented a Strategic Math Program in each class three times a week that is well structured to address the school wide needs of our students. This mirrors our Strategic Reading Program which was established in our last school year. Our key focus continues to be professional learning based on our school-wide focus and facilitated by our 23 member Inquiry Team. As referenced in our Quality Review for the 2014-2015 school year, Systems for Improvement was noted as an area of celebration. Moving forward, and in continuing our success, teacher teams collaborate on Monday and Tuesday afternoon, as well as on Google Drive and on department created websites. Additionally, we have instituted Common Planning periods for each department that provides additional 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  time for collaboration and inter-visitation. Also, we have four Teacher Leaders (three Model Teachers and a Peer Collaborative Teachers) who provide continuous support in our school-wide focus areas and in providing continuous professional learning. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R061 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 981 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 31 35 12 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 12 22 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 77.9% % Reduced Lunch 11.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 45.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 15.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.09 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 35.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A YSH YES NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 22 24 89.9% 3.8% 30.2% 32.8% 4.0% 2.3% 8 20% 8 21.9% 34% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes No YES YES N/A NO NO NO YES N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Instruction is tailored to student needs, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. 2014-2015 /Quality Review : Instructional Core-Well Developed Coherent Instruction Well Developed Align Assessments and Analyze Information Focus for this school year is on providing professional learning for teachers to develop all lesson plans that address student data and achievement needs in each classroom. In addition, we are targeting our use of formative and summative assessments during Common Planning Periods, as we move students towards self-assessment practices that promote student ownership of learning. To address our achievement levels of subgroups we have implemented specific practices that will target areas in need of improvement, specifically Read 180, Collaborative Strategic Reading, Strategic Reading and Math Periods, Great Leaps, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Achieve 3000 and MobyMax. Each of theses programs addresses needs as indicated in our school report card. We have also partnered with MSQI, which provides strategy skill training for our staff and provides coaching support from a coach who is scheduled regularly to address our struggling readers. In addition, to address the needs of our students based on sixth grade Scantron data as a baseline, we will continue our cohort with our feeder school fifth grade teachers in order to establish seamless best practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2017, the number of students performing at level 1 in ELA and mathematics will decrease as measured by New York State ELA and mathematics test results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September- June with bi-weekly reflections to address effectiveness School leaders, literacy coach, special education and mathematics lead teachers, teacher mentors, inquiry team, data specialist. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Student advisory commitee for all three grades. Meet once a month to discuss academic progress. All school community. 2. Continue to support reading intervention programs-Striving Readers – REWARDS, WILSON, ORTON-GILLINGHAM 3. Strategic Mathematics and Strategic Reading. 4. Provide common planning time for teachers to analyze Item Skills analysis to plan for differentiated instruction 5. Teachers will use data to analyze students’ current performance levels as well as their progress from 2016-2017 ICT classes for all three grades 6. 7. Provide support to strengthen ICT partnerships 8. Use of technology based reading and math intervention programs- monitoring of skills using READ 180, Scantron, Great Leaps, MobyMax, Achieve 3000. 9. Change in instructional model and programming of ELL teacher to a push in/pull out model 10. Varied instructional strategies will be evident in all classrooms, with a focus on the "I do, we do, you do" format as teachers model their thinking to provide students with a model of brain moves 11. Increased use of technology (SMART boards, ELMOs, iPads) to support instructional strategies 12. Teachers will use multiple entry points in instruction and employ varied teaching styles through the use of data collected from formative assessments 13. Professional development will be provided by Peer Collaborative and Model Teachers, Learning Partner Plus Program, DOE and webinars 14. Model and share best practices, support teachers by intervisitations, assist in lesson plan development, assist in development of classroom rituals and routines and the implementation of PBIS 15. Implementation Year 6 of Keystone program for ELLs, which provides explicit, intensive, and focused instruction that accelerates students’ language acquisition and reading comprehension skills, as well as provide the CSR program, which engages students in collaborative strategic reading 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  strategies. ELL students also utilize the Achieve 3000 instructional program. 16. Provide supplemental instruction in an COMPAS after school program 17. Implement Scantron Performance Series Grade 6-8, 2X a year 18. Teacher prepared Data Binders 19. Engage in a protocol to look at current student work and common planning during Professional Learning Communities 20. Unpack and analyze selected Common Core standards to identify gaps between what students are doing currently, and what the CCLS asks them to know and be able to do. 21. Teacher teams design, and/or revise CCLS aligned curriculum Units of Study with embedded rigorous performance tasks 22. Implement CCLS units with an embedded literacy task that asks students to read and analyze informational texts and write opinions and arguments in response 23. Teacher teams plan and provide multiple entry points to lessons for all learners including ELLs and SWDs 24. Providing literacy intervention strategies through MSQI- Wilson Just Words, Word Generation, Orton-Gillingham 25. Participation in Advanced Literacy Instruction for ELLs Achievement Institute 26. Teachers will provide books in native language to support students 27. Use of technology based math intervention programs Success Maker, Great Leaps, Moby Max 28. Continue to provide family workshops addressing needs of students in various area of academic and emotional development. Teacher prepared Data Binders implementation of Student Brain Book, which provides a personal reference for students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Budget - Per session/diem rate , human resources, programming adjustments 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Data specialist will conduct an analysis of Scantron and Item Skills analysis of the New York State ELA and mathematics exam. The mid-year assessment will be analyzed to determine if growth has been established in identified areas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2018, as a result of the school's implementation of effective instructional decisions and practices, 20% of students will demonstrate proficiency level 2 or higher, as measured by mid-year ELA and math assessments aligned to the New York State ELA and math and Scantron data in ELA and Math. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. X 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The entire staff will continue to implement strategies from "Teach Like a Champion" and PBIS through out the school to foster a positive learning environment where the needs of all students will be met to address our School Quality Snapshot indicating that not all students feel safe. Our strength is collaborative reflection by all staff, where we can address this area. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, as a result of the implementation of schoolwide collaborations such as a mid-year school-wide survey and with ongoing feedback from our Student Advisory Committee and family-parent/community efforts to support students, 70% of students will respond positively to questions related to support and safety, as measured by their responses on 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  the school's spring learning environment survey and to establish a school culture where students feel safe and supported . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 1. Inquiry Team (Grade Level, Department) 2. Staff 3. PBIS Core Committee 4. Special Education and Math Lead teacher 5. Literacy Coach Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? All school support staff, students, and families September 2017-June 2018  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Teach Like a Champion by Doug Lemov book study 2. Faculty and student handbook 3. Strategic programming of key staff members such as the deans, guidance counselors and team leaders to support student personal and academic success. 4. The Dean, Assistant Principal and Guidance Counselor travel with students for a three year cycle, to build a sense of cohesion and support our school goal of knowing our students. 5. PBIS School -Wide Matrix - Created by Core Team, which identified expectations for behavior in all areas of the school building: cafeteria, classroom, hallway, auditorium, perimeter, bus and schoolyard. 6. Morris Money Reward System- Specific reward amounts were identified for specific expectations listed on a School Wide Matrix to create a uniform code of conduct. 7. Daily morning announcements are made by a committee of students to create a student-centered culture related to the expectations indicated on the school-wide matrix. 8. Restructuring of the Save-Room procedures to ensure a streamlined learning environment. 9. Teachers present in hallways during class changes to ensure safe transitions and promote positive expectations identified in the school-wide matrix. 10. An orderly arrival procedure with designated entrances for each grade to monitor the flow of student traffic. 11. School wide expectations are posted on a matrix throughout the building as reminders of school norms and expectations. 12. SAPIS provider delivers anti-bullying lessons for all students within four-week cycles to support students in using positive behavior strategies. 13. School Mobile Response Team (SRT) provides support for families in crisis through a referral process 14. Principals List, Honor Roll, Merit Roll are awarded to students based on academic achievements. Awards 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Assemblies are held quarterly to celebrate and publicly acknowledge academic success. 15. Leader’s Club promotes community based outreach, volunteerism and philanthropic events 16. Class Section Sheets are used to track daily behavior and provide evidence for rewards. 17. Student Daily Reports for students in need of behavioral management and monitoring 18. Pupil Personel Team (PPT)-identify students in need and provides academic and emotional supports Parent/Community Communication   School website provides updated information for parents and students about school activities and events School Messenger Automated Phone System used in conjunction with our school Facebook page has allowed our school to “go green” through paperless communication with all students and parents. This site has resulted in over 100,000 individual messages being sent to our students and staff members’ homes this year. The system enjoys a 97% successful contact rate with our families and staff. Messages are sent out to parents in various languages. Parents receive personal messages informing them of instructional expectations.  Parent Resource Center to train parents in supporting their   child in Math, academic vocabulary, Common Core Standards and the transition to the next grade level. Family Fun Nights and Dinner Theatre to promote community spirit. SAT Articulation Feeder School Meeting to convey our expectations and ensure a seamless transition for incoming 6th graders.  Discipline Code Assemblies to provide clear expectations for good citizenship.  Allowing Student access to the library during student lunch periods  Remind 101  Skedula/Pupil Path: Attendance, Gradebook, Anecdotals, Performance Levels, Progress Report monitoring Family Fun Night  Parent Engagement- every Tuesday afternoon   Parent Guide IEP meetings   Curriculum Night  Dinner Theater  Winter Concert, Spring Musical  Team minutes   Class Contracts/Course Introduction Letters outlining class Student/Class section sheets and daily reports expectations 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23 Library  Common Core Rubrics with Next Steps  Magnet testing program  PTA  College and Career Day - School Spirit Week   NBA FIT funded gymnasium   Mathematics website  ELA Website  Three iMac computer labs as well as classroom labs   Twitter Facebook page Instagram High Expectations to Students & College and Career Readiness Student Handbook School wide grading policy    Emphasis on attendance and punctuality  Students monitor their progress through the use of Pupil Path  Rigorous portfolio tasks & student self-reflection four times a year  Use of Common Core rubrics  Honor Roll, Merit Roll, Principal’s Honor Roll  PBIS Matrix expectations and Teach Like a Champion techniques (No-Opt Out and SLANT) are visible through the of use of discussion symbol and whiteboard activities.  Accountable Talk Discussion Stems and student-to-student led interactions  Academic Progress Reports  Entry Tasks/Exit Slips  Data Walls/Lexile People  Partnerships with Curtis High School, Staten Island Tech, McKee High School, PS 16 Student Government  New York State Regent Exams  Real-life work experiences in the W.A.M. Store   Career Day  College Spirit Week   Magnet Talent Programs  “Soar to Success” After School Program Leader’s Club Specialized High School Test Prep program 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Ongoing throughout the 2017-18 school year, staff will utilize the Teach Like a Champion by Doug Lemov book study to support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support their children at home.S trategic programming of key staff members such as the deans, guidance counselors and team leaders to support student personal and academic success. The Dean, Assistant Principal and Guidance Counselor travel with students for a three year cycle, to build a sense of cohesion and support our school goal of knowing our students.Our SAPIS provider delivers anti-bullying lessons for all students within four-week cycles to support students in using positive behavior strategies. In addition, our School Mobile Response Team (SRT) provides support for families in crisis through a referral process and provides services to families within their homes , or in the community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Inquiry team is comprised of teachers per session rate PBIS Core Committee meetings on going throughout the year per session Human Resources Programming adjustments Community Partnerships Private Grants Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, as a result of the implementation of school-wide programs and family-parent/community efforts to support students, 70% of students will respond positively to questions related to support and safety, as measured by their responses on a school-created student survey, including similar questions from the learning environment survey. An approximate measure of half of the annual percentage of students or number of students with positive responses will serve as the mid-point benchmark. Progress will be monitored by student and family surveys, staff exit slips, teacher observations, meetings and minutes (ongoing, February/June 2018) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Survey Monkey through Skedula, staff exit slips, teacher observations, meetings and minutes (ongoing, February/June 2018) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As indicated in our School Quality Snapshot, collaboration among our staff is highly effective. We have implemented Common Planning time throughout the day to provide time for unit/lesson planning to address student needs, with uneven effectiveness due to programming constraints, which is our priority for the mid-year schedule adjustments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 100% of teachers will be engaged in professional learning aligning to our school-wide instructional focus, in order to improve teacher practice, as measured by Advance Aggregate Data with an increase in component ratings (3b, 3c and 3d) by June 2018. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All support staff, students September-June 1. School Leaders Inquiry team 2. 3. Teachers Special Education and Math Lead Teacher Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Staff Development sessions on Danielson Framework 2. Curriculum Writing is focused on three they elements to improve student outcomes: 1. Differentiation 2. Academic Vocabulary 3. Quality Questioning (from Inquiry Team’s book study of Thinking Through Quality Questioning) 3. Weekly Collaborative Sessions – Framework PD turn-keyed 4. School Leaders set up and follow a schedule for teacher observations/walkthroughs and feedback using a framework for teachers 5. Engaging in the Learning Partners Plus (LPP) 6. Professional Learning Communities will engage in the following Staff Development sessions: Citywide Instructional Expectations for 2015-2016, IS61 Data Overview, ADVANCE, MSQI, Frame Game Activity, Questioning and Discussion Techniques, Making Thinking Visible book study, ELLs Professional Development 2015-16 7. Establish regular meeting times for department teacher teams. 8. Collaborative curriculum planning by department led by department supervisor 9. Data analysis and accountability provided to Instructional Leadership Team by DOE Office of Systems, Data and Accountability 10. Data analysis and accountability provided to staff by Data Specialist and Principal 11. Extended Cabinet meetings weekly and Extended Cabinet Plus bi-weekly. During common planning time, use of a protocol for Looking at Student Work to identify instructional needs 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Curriculum Night will utilize the time for parents to understand and review key points/skills by each content area. All teacher teams will present a PowerPoint by subject areas. We will continue to utilize the Math Resource Center to provide workshops for parents around CCLS in mathematics and how they could support their child at home. The Peer Collaborative Math Teacher, Supervisor of Mathematics, and Lead Mathematics teachers will hold workshops each quarter of the 2017- 2018 school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Learning Partners Plus (LPP) funding- Three Model Teachers and Two Peer Collaborative Teachers, Human Resources, MSQI Coordinators, Literacy Coach Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School Leaders will utilize on-going reporting in Advance by tracking data and pedagogical progress in February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Aggregate Data and school create Advance charts. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve X critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Our strength is setting a system to monitor progress: o Collaboratively establishing systems in self-assessment observation to ensure timely observation and o feedback in order to track improvement in practice. Initial Planning Conferences were based on past Advance data as well as overall Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) and the Student Perception Survey.  Our area of need: o Effectively adhere to observation time frame for completion. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  By June 2018, as a result of school leaders' effective implementation of the Advance system of evaluation and support, with effective actionable feedback to teachers, 80% of teachers will achieve ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in components that is(are) reflective of the school's instructional focus (3b, 3c, or 3d), as measured by the reports function pie chart in Advance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Weekly Extended Cabinet meetings to evaluate Advance ratings and ensure established norms are apparent. All pedagogues September '16- June '17 All administrators Bi-Weekly Extended Cabinet Plus meeting (with teacher leads) to evaluate Advance trends and provide targeted support in areas of the school wide instructional focus. All pedagogues September 16 - June 17 All administrators PCT's LPP Model Teachers All administrators PCT's LPP Model Teachers Establish actionable feedback next steps that are in alignment with Instructional Focus. All pedagogues September 16 - June 17 Track Advance completion utilizing Advance created chart. Administrators Septemebr- Administrators June '18 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. LPP and Two Peer Collaborative Teachers and Three Model Teachers, Human Resources, Programming Adjustment, Per session rate Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Benchmarks will be tracked in November, January, March and April through Advance reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. X 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school prides itself on reflective practices and outreach to our families as indicated in our School Quality Snapshot. Our area of focus is motivating our families to visit our school more frequently and establish a pathway for more communication. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To strengthen the school learning environment during the 2016-2017 school year, we will “extend the effective practices of communicating with families and deepen the work of messaging academic expectations around the CCLS so that all students and families know how to reach higher levels of achievement” as measured by an increase in our rating on the School Quality Snapshot. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  2018-19 SCEP-FL 35 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The parents, community members, teachers, administration and PTA will be targeted. September-June School Leaders Inquiry team Teachers Paraprofessionals Teacher Leads Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Added parent programs 1. Added parent programs 2. 3 computer labs 3. Library with Media room 4. Distributed Parent Handbook 5. Utilize School Messenger 6. Utilize Skedula by all teachers 7. Open House Night, Curriculum Night, Student led announcements, Extended Parent Teacher Conferences, and Fresh Start Events. 8. Provide student updates by Team meetings minutes sent to Administration, Literacy coach, Special Education and Mathematics Lead Teacher, Data Specialist 9. Continue progress reports for every student 4 x a year 10. Communication enhanced through teacher team meetings by department. 11. Skedula used to communicate with students in all teams throughout school 12. Strengthen the school learning environment by accentuating the positive through the PBIS Program and WAM store 13. School-wide Implementation of PBIS program 14. Parent Resource Center 15. Pupil Path Workshop 16. New family friendly website 17. Student Led conferences in lieu of traditional PT conferences 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Budget - Inquiry team is comprised of teachers PBIS Core Committee meetings are ongoing throughout the year, per session rate Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2017, we will review family engagement school activities: attendance sign in sheets, parent-teacher attendance using student-led conferences as a means to engage more parents. We will also analyze school messenger reports and survey families mid-year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measurement we are using are parent and student feedback, Pupil Path messenger, parent and student surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) ScantronReading Assessment (LEXILE), Divisions of Reading Power (DRP), NYSELAAssessment (Item Analysis) Orton-GillinghamReading (Pre-Assessment) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Reading Interventions are administered to all students 3 periods per week, on days when ELAclasses meet in 90 minute blocks. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) We use a variety of Literacy AIS services at I.S. 61: Strategic Reading Lessons:  Strategic Reading -three periods per week- to support all readers needs, grounded in analysis of both formative and summative assessment data.  Guided Reading groups  to diagnose areas of need in individual students reading comprehension skills. Strategy Groups to support groups of students who are struggle with similar reading skills.  WholeGroup Small Group  (3-5 Students)  One-on-One Support *Strategic Lessons follow "Cycle of Learning":  Model ("I Do")  Guided Practice ("We Do") Independent Practice ("You Do")  ENL Push-In / Pull-Out Groups Researched-based interventions including:  WILSON READING / ORTON-GILLINGHAM (Phonics), JUST WORDS (Emerging Phonics),   GREAT LEAPS (Fluency), 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Mathematics Scantron State Exam Item Skills Analysis During the school day and after school  WORD-GENERATION (Vocabulary),  ACHIEVE 3000 (Reading Comprehension/ELL). We use a variety of Math AIS services at I.S. 61. Small group and one-to-one  This year every student receivestwo-twenty minute sessions of Strategic Mathematics. Strategic Mathematics is made up of three stations, Fluency (where students work on word problems), Fundamentals(students work on basic skills; addition, subtraction, multiplication and division) and Feedback (students work in a small targeted intervention group with their students). During Strategic Mathematics, teachers effectively model the standards to the students. All students are selected to participate in this program.  MobyMax is used on  targeted students that are level 1's and 2's so that teachers can assign students specific skills to build mathematics concepts. ICTand Special education students are using Great Leaps in mathematics to build fluency and repetition in addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Science MOSL Social Studies MOSL   Scantron Performance Series - all grades/school day and after school, small group, 2X a year Soar to Success –6th, 7th and 8th grades/after school, small group. Students selected based on teacher recommendation and level 1's, 2's and 3's.  Title III ELLs Enrichment Program/6th, 7th and 8th,after school, small group, criteria are ELLsthat are level 1's and 2's.  Algebra I Common Core enrichment after school program. Students are selected based on low scores on assessments and report card grades. This intervention is set in place to provide students individualized regent preparation. An after school tutorial program services targeted students in order to prepare them for the State Science Performance and Written exams and NY State Regents will begin in the spring, small group. Students were selected based on their science baseline assessment and teacher recommendation. An after school tutorial program services targeted students in order to prepare them for the Social Studies baseline assessment. Students were selected based on their social studies baseline Small group and one-to-one During the school day and after school Small group and one-to-one During the school day and after school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40 One- to-one and group During the school day and after school Referrals At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) assessment and teacher recommendation. Throughout the school day this program targets all students and provides an opportunity to address concerns such as adolescent daily struggles, educational neglect, child abuse and suicide. The counselors work closely with school personnel in providing behavior management Tier I intervention strategies to classroom teachers. They are responsible for facilitating the high school process for our eighth grade. Through PPT meetings, our SBST, SAPIS and Guidance Counselors provide support to at risk students and families. Throughout the school day the school psychologist targets all at risk students who are in need of counseling and facilitates the referral to the Committee of Special Education. Through PPT meetings, our SBST, SAPIS and Guidance Counselors provide support to at risk students and families. The Social Worker provides services to all at risk students who are in need of counseling and/or referral to the Committee of Special Education. Through PPT meetings, our SBST, SAPIS and Guidance Counselors provide support to at risk students and families. This program targets all at risk students who are in need of other health related services. This program allows students to deal with a variety of issues 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  facing adolescent students and their families. Through PPT meetings, our SBST, SAPIS and Guidance Counselors provide support to at risk students and families Mobile Response Team. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 19 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Ensure transportation is effectively provided, appropriate seasonal clothing is monitored, school supplies are provided, emotional support is provided, meals are monitored,frequent "checking-in" with shelter support services. Utilization of School Response Team to visit houses when necessary. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Administration checks Open Market online  We collaborate with CSI’s New Teacher Academy for math and science candidates  We collaborate with CSI’s and St. John’s student teacher programs and professors’ recommendations  We evaluate substitute teachers that have worked in our building  We go to Hiring Halls to collect resumes and interview candidates  We established a New Teacher Mentor program where the mentor meets with New Teacher 5x a week for the school year.  We ask for references from our School Support Organization. We provide professional development during and after the school day through workshops, team meetings, curriculum meetings and literacy and math planning period, Lunch and Learns, Webinars, Online Tutorials, DOE workshops. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Danielson Framework - Assistant Principal & Principal  Reflection tool after observation  Feedback is provided after an observation Peer Collaborative Teachers -  Conduct focused visitations based on Advance data from Assistant Principals’ observation findings.  Provide teachers with targeted (non-evaluative) feedback and next steps; including scheduling visits to model teachers/laboratory classrooms (MSQI). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Provide staff with professional learning opportunities during Monday Professional Learning Sessions on topics identified as school wide needs. (i.e. 2016 NYS Math & ELA Data Analysis, Unpacking State Assessment Questions by Standard, Targeted Intervention Planning for Strategic Reading and Strategic Math, Deliberate Teaching w/ Co-Constructed Success Criteria)  Provide teachers with Look For & Listen For Observation Tool (grounded in the Danielson Framework) to focus lab classroom visits. Model Teachers -  Based on feedback from the Peer Collaborative teachers and Assistant Principals, Model Teacher have established their classrooms as “Lab Sites” to model best instructional practices in school wide focus areas. Provide staff professional developments during Monday Professional Learning Communities on topics identified as school wide needs. (i.e. 2016 NYS Math & ELA Data Analysis, Unpacking State Assessment Questions by Standard, Targeted Intervention Planning for Strategic Reading and Strategic Math, Deliberate Teaching w/ Co-Constructed Success Criteria) Strategic Mathematics -  Based on our NYS Exam Mathematics data, 80% of our students are level 1’s and 2’s and there was a need for Academic Intervention Support. We created a program based on Strategic Reading, focusing around the 3 - F’s of mathematics; Fluency, Fundamentals, Feedback. Students participate in Strategic Mathematics for two-twenty minute sessions each week. Teachers fill in a Teacher Intervention Plan for Students (TIPs) based on the students’ Scantron and MobyMax data. Strategic Reading - We are in our fourth year of implementing Targeted Intervention Plans (T.I.P.s) to provide Strategic Reading to support all readers, with specific focus on students achieving below Levels 1 & 2 on the NYS ELA Exam. Our teachers prepare T.I.P.s during 4-5 Collaborative Planning periods per week, and Strategic Reading is provided to students three periods per week. Decisions regarding targeted interventions are informed by data analysis of the NYS ELA, the DRP (administered through the Middle School Quality Initiative) and the Scantron Performance Series-Reading assessments. I.S. 61 currently offers a variety of researched-based interventions including: WILSON READING / ORTON-GILLINGHAM (Phonics), JUST WORDS (Emerging Phonics), GREAT LEAPS (Fluency), WORD-GENERATION (Vocabulary), and ACHIEVE 3000 (Reading Comprehension/ELL).  The Inquiry Team is engaged in the Japanese Lesson Study which is an Inquiry protocol used to examine work. The team is comprised of five subgroups that will complete four Cycles of Learning. Each member of the team will present a lesson surround the “Now what?” of the formative assessment cycle. Members will observe the students to identify the achievement gaps and will uncover adjustments to these issues during the debrief of the lesson study. Teachers will then re-plan and re-execute the lesson while members observe and take low- 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  inference notes. The purpose of the Cycle of Learning is to close the achievement gaps by teaching students the way they learn best. Success Criteria is embedded in each lesson, in every department. Students use the Success Criteria checklist to self-assess their learning and identify their areas of struggle.   Effective Deliberate Teaching (a.k.a. Modeling) has become a school wide focus based on the Advance data. Prior to the professional development teachers were “telling” rather than “showing” their students what was expected of them during the modeling portion of the lesson. On November 8, 2016 (Election Day) our teacher leads provided our staff with school-wide professional learning, focused on effective modeling strategies for each subject department. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) X X X X X X X Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 647,059.00 16979.00 0 0 11,200.00 0 6,810,402.00 X X X X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48   A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. William A. Morris, I.S. 61, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. William A. Morris, I.S. 61, will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51    schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) William A. Morris, I.S. 61, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by:  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54   participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   3. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities      attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully;always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: William A. Morris I.S.61 This school is (check one): DBN: 31R061 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 50 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: I.S.61 offers an English after-school enrichment program, "Enrich, Succeed, Learn", that provides test preparation for at least 30 (expected amount-50) general and special education English Language Learners within grades 6, 7, 8. This program helps students build essential literacy skills by immersion in an all English environment. The activities in the after school program will provide explicit focused instruction that accelerates students' language acquisition and reading comprehension. In addition, after strategies are introduced and practiced, students will be able to master strategies by applying them to reading/writing exercises. Students will practice responding to text-dependent questions, similar to those that will appear on the ELA and NYSESLAT exam. English Language Learners within the subcategory of the lowest third and students with disabilities are our targeted subgroups. This program focuses on improving students’ literacy levels, reading and math skills through specialized programs and by test-taking skills for the NYSESLAT, ELA, and Math State exams. This program will last for 14 weeks, from January 16, 2019 through April 25, 2019, there will be a total of 28 sessions. It meets every Wednesday and Thursday (2 times a week) from 2:15PM-4:15PM. There will be three 40 minute blocks for each subject area (ELA, ENL, Math). Students will rotate from each subject throughout the 2 hour period. Students will be grouped flexibly according to their reading/NYSESLAT proficiency levels. The flexible grouping and use of the team teaching model is determined by quantitative data taken from the student's SCANTRON and DRP scores which determine their Lexile Level (reading level). Based on the DRP data, any student that scored lower than a 45 required a reading intervention program and is considered to be at-risk and below grade level. On the other hand, qualitative data, such as student work pieces and classroom assessments and other formative assessments focused around the four modalities (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) provide insight of student academic progress. Students' scores and the breakdown of the standards from the NYS Math exam also help determine groups. The Math teacher begins the program by administering a pre-test that aligns with the Common Core State Standards. From this the teacher will plan their strategic math lessons based on the skills needing improvement. The schedule will be as follows: the first block will be from 2:15PM-2:50PM, the second block will be from 2:53PM-3:38PM, and the final block will be from 3:40PM-4:15PM. Group 1 (non-readers/emerging-entering group) will begin with an ENL block, then move to ELA, and finally end with a math block. Group 2 (low level readers/entering-transitioning) schedule will be Math, ENL, ELA. Group 3 (slightly below grade level readers/ transitioning-expanding) schedule will be ELA, Math, ENL. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information There will be 4 content certified teachers; they include 1 certified TESOL teacher, 3 certified secondary educators (the ELA teachers and Math teacher). Both ELA licensed teachers working the program are WIlson and Orton Gillingham trained. The assistant principal will supervise the program. For home language support, students will be provided with bilingual glossaries (which they carry with them throughout the year) and iPads for any translations. In addition, students will be able to use Heinle Content Area Picture Dictionaries which will be available for reference in each of the classrooms. The ELA teachers will incorporate Wilson, Orton Gillingham and Just Words strategies as means to instruct students with reading comprehension strategies that will prepare them for the ELA exam. The ELA teacher will scaffold these strategies with struggling readers by accessing leveled content via ReadWorks.org and NewsELA. Students will be provided with technology such as iPads in the ENL time period as supplemental resources, where they can access educational apps, google translate, etc. for individualized reinforcement. The ENL teachers will also use Continental's New York ELLs test preparation book and Randall’s Listening Lab (esl-lab.com) for NYSESLAT preparation. These workbooks are divided into Listening, Speaking, Reading, and Writing subsections. There is also an ELA Transitioning section of the book that can be incorporated into the ELA period of the program. The Math teacher will use Success Maker software, which is the computer component to the CMP3 curriculum used in our school. It combines the instruction of fundamental skills with development of higher-order thinking strategies. Success Maker is completely customized, built around the program's ongoing analysis of each student's actual performance. It includes on-demand interventions, including scaffolded feedback, step-by-step tutorials and prerequisite instruction triggered when a learner encounters challenges. It is beneficial due to its powerful data management that monitors student progress, customizes lessons and forecasts achievement. This program aims to help ELL striving readers to master vocabulary, fluency, comprehension, listening, and writing skills. In addition it will enhance ELLs' mathematical skills by revisiting and improving upon the essential fundamental skills that are required by students. The skills that we will reinforce and the tasks that students will complete through this program will align with the Common Core State Standards. Student attendance will be taken within the 15 minute window (2:00PM-2:15PM) as students are having a snack. This will be the initial attendance for the program, if there are any students absent from the program, we will contact their family (by phone) to make sure that the family is aware of their child's status. (The Translation & Interpretation Unit will be utilized to communicate with parents/guardians if there is a known language barrier). Promptly at 2:15pm, teachers will bring their groups to their classrooms and take attendance using Google Drive within their classroom. As students circulate to the different sessions, their attendance is taken. All attendance records in Google Drive are accessible and automatically updated, allowing all teachers and administration to have immediate access to these records, in addition to parent contact information. If there is any discrepancy, the Assistant Principal will be notified immediately. Families will be notified of the ENL program by sign-up sheets that are distributed to each ELL during the school day. Each program notification letter will be double-sided with English printed on one side and the preferred language on the other side. Due to this, the program notification letters will be individualized according to the families' language preferences. These written notices will be translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit online services. In addition, the School Messenger will inform parents of ELLs about the program. The School Messenger is an automated telephone service that provides important messages for families. These messages are translated into various languages so that all of our students' families will understand the content. Along with this, the ENL teacher will inform parents about the after 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information school program during parent meetings whether it be via a one-to-one meeting or during Parent Teacher Conferences (the first one is September 20, 2018 and the second conference dates are November 27, 2018 and November 28, 2018.) Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Mrs. Grandinetti and Ms. Cucuzza, the ENL teachers will be facilitating a professional development to staff, including those participating in the Title 3 program, about the CSR (Collaborative Strategic Reading) strategy. CSR emphasizes student-centered learning being that each student is responsible for fulfilling a specific role, such as the CSR Leader, Clunk Expert, Gist Expert, and Question Expert. Students must use close reading strategies to deepen their comprehension of content area text.The core components of CSR (before, during, and after reading strategies); facilitate student-led, text-based discussions; and use CSR to support students with diverse learning needs including English language learners and students with reading disabilities in heterogeneous classrooms. They will coordinate and plan for successful integration of CSR into existing structures (e.g., introducing strategies to students, selecting text, fine tuning strategy use, providing feedback). Last year Mrs. Grandinetti participated in a three series webinar on fine tuning the CSR (Collaborative Strategic Reading) strategy. This was hosted by Alison Boardman, a representative for CSR. The webinar was called "CSR Professional Collaboration" and the dates were May 7, 2018, May 14, 2018 and May 21, 2018. This strategy will be also implemented by teachers during the Title 3 program and will be given at no cost to the Title 3 program. The ENL teacher, Mrs. Grandinetti, attended a three day book study at Petrides centered on ELLS in their math class. These PDs were on June 14, 2018, June 20, 2018, and June 21, 2018 from 3:15PM-5:15PM. The name of this PD is "Making Number Talks Matter", which requires students to mentally solve computation problems and talk about their strategies. The purpose of this is to have students understand and be able to explain how math problems work. This process mandates that students utilize academic vocabulary in order to explain the steps that they took to solve the computation problem. Students have to either agree or disagree with each other and defend their reasoning for how they arrived at a particular answer. Discussion amongst students foster during this and it encourages a more "hands on" approach in math. These strategies will be turn-keyed to co-workers and will be implemented within the Title 3 program. These sessions are at no cost to the Title 3 program. Teachers will attend ongoing professional development in relation to the Title 3 program. Throughout the school year, Literacy teachers had Brenda Stewart from Generation Ready/MSQI visit their classrooms to assist teachers during guided reading groups during strategic reading periods. Brenda would observe teachers and then provide feedback during collaborative planning periods with other ELA teachers of the same grade, and demonstrate lessons with the class. Brenda would spend the entire school day (7:40-2:00) with teachers. Brenda visited our school on March 20, 2018, April 27, 2018, May 3, 2018, May 10, 2018, and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part C: Professional Development May 16, 2018. These strategies will be turn-keyed to our co-workers and will be implemented within the Title 3 program. These sessions are at no cost to the Title 3 program. During the 2018-2019 school year the UFT Teacher Center will be stationed within our school to support teachers' professional development. This center will build upon our school's instructional practices for all content area teachers. Teachers will be able to access these supports throughout the school day. Professional development workshops will be provided on a weekly basis (Monday afternoon). Teachers will receive CTLE hours for these workshops. The first PD that will be given is focused on Co-Teaching and will take place on November 6, 2018. Teachers will learn about useful strategies that will be implemented into their pedagogy. This is at no cost to the Title 3 program. All teachers will participate in a refresher workshop on "Academic Conversations" provided by I.S.61's Inquiry Team. The date is to be determined and it will be given on a Monday afternoon within our school. The introductory PD was given on Tuesday, November 7, 2017. Our school-wide goal is to have students hold academic conversations during their classes. This method will also be used during the after school program. Academic conversations consist of elaborate and clarify, support ideas with examples, paraphrase, build on/ challenge ideas, and synthesize. Each academic conversation part consists of interactive hand movements to help remember, and support academic conversations between student to students or teacher to student. This will be at no cost to the Title 3 program. This school year, Literacy teachers will have Alanah Leonini from MSQI visit their classrooms to assist teachers during Expeditionary Learning curriculum periods. Alanah observes teachers and provides feedback during their collaborative planning periods with other ELA teachers of the same grade, and demonstrates lessons with the class. Alanah spends the entire school day (7:40-2:00) with teachers. Alanah will visit our school once or twice a month throughout the entire school year. These strategies will be turn-keyed to our co-workers and will be implemented within the Title 3 program. These sessions are at no cost to the Title 3 program. The Math department will receive professional development workshops facilitated by Algebra for All, which is sponsored by the Department of Education. These workshops introduce teachers to the SOLVE strategy for problem solving, which will be implemented into their pedagogy. The dates are to be determined but they will take place at our school on Monday afternoons. This will be at no cost to the Title 3 program. Teachers will be encouraged to attend the "cELLebrating" UFT Conference on Effective Instruction for English Language Learners sponsored by the United Federation of Teachers, NYC Department of Education, and NYS/NYC Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network at Fordham University and the Internationals Network for Public Schools. This professional development is on October 20, 2018 from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m at the UFT Headquarters (Shantum Hall). Being that there are many workshops being offered, teachers will select two workshops they feel they need the most support in. This will be at no cost to the Title 3 program. At this point, the ENL teachers are waiting and eager to receive more professional development opportunities given by the Field Support Center (Petrides). Any professional development that they attend will be turnkeyed to staff members. This will be at no expense to the Title 3 program. At each PD that is turnkeyed to our colleagues, staff members must sign in to verify their attendance. The attendance sheet will then be taken and submitted to the general office. Also, agendas, copies of the presentation and useful resources (handouts, key information, etc) will be provided to the staff at the Professional Development. All copies of the agendas and attendance will be stored in Mrs. Chiappone's office (Mrs. Chiappone is the assistant principal that is head of the Literacy/ENL department). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Part C: Professional Development It is essential that teachers continuously attend Professional Development workshops so that they can implement new strategies into their pedagogy. All students have unique learning styles, so it is necessary that teachers be able to use multiple methods. ELLs are held to the same expectations as native English speakers; therefore, it is vital that their teachers are equipped with proven techniques and strategies to enhance their pedagogy. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents are notified about a "Spanish Language Family Engagement Conference" workshop sponsored by FACE, the Division of Family and Community Engagement, and the NYC Department of Education. This will take place on Friday, July 13, 2018 at Hunter College (695 Park Avenue, New York) from 8:45 am-12:30pm. This ELLs parent conference includes informative breakout sessions, resources regarding available community services, and workshops for parents. This informs and encourages parents to take an active role in their child's education. This conference is available for all Spanish-speaking parents of ELLs. Parents must register with through the EventBright and purchase a ticket for $25.00. , whom will send a headcount and specific translator requests to the Staten I Monthly activities will give parents the opportunity to actively participate in their child’s learning environment. For every activity/workshop parents are notified by letters sent home (in parents preferred language), an announcement on the I.S.61 website, and phone calls made by an automated recording system. The recording system also translates messages to each family, if a language other than English is preferred. In addition, translators will be available at all of these workshops/activities.Parents are welcome to attend I.S.61's Curriculum Night which is held in the beginning of every school year. All staff members are present to meet their students' families. The purpose of Curriculum Night is for parents to get acquainted with the curriculum being taught in all of their child's classes. Teachers explain the skills and content that students will be learning and even show parents textbooks, workbooks, novels, and any other supplemental text/materials that students will use on a daily basis. Staff members also discuss school-wide and classroom expectations to parents.Additional activities include Family Fun Nights where students’ families are invited to share in various activities such as arts and crafts. Family Fun Nights occur once a month from 6 PM to 7:30 PM. The parents will be notified about these event by receiving a sign-up form in English and their native language; it will also be posted on the school's website (IS61knights.org). Each Family Fun Night has a theme that relates to that particular time of the school year. A harvest theme is used for Family Fun Night on October 25, 2018 from 6-7:30PM. On December 20, 2018 (from 6-7:30 PM) we will host a holiday theme for Family Fun Night and on June 6, 2019 (from 6PM-7:30PM) we will host a Family Fun Night BBQ. These activities give students and parents to experience American culture first hand and are always welcome to share their own culture as well. These activities are a way to build relationships between the parents and teachers by doing something fun and meaningful with their 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities entire family. These nights also give parents an opportunity to speak with teachers and be informed of their child's academic progress and important upcoming school events. Teachers, administration and paraprofessionals of IS61 ENL and Special Education departments will be providing the support needed for these events.Every June the ENL department has a Culture Day festival in which students prepare projects (depending on grade level) based on their family’s culture or of a culture they are interested in researching and exploring. Students will not only present these projects and essays but will bring in food or items from their native culture ( or the culture they researched). Parents are invited to attend culture day and view the presentations and essays the students created.The translation services will provide translators for these events. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name William A. Morris Borough Staten Island School Number 061 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Susan Tronolone Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Francesca Grandinetti Teacher/Subject Area Steven Rose Teacher/Subject Area Vanessa Cucuzza Related-Service Provider Monica Ekelund Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal Angela Chiappone Coach N/A School Counselor Christine Cusato Parent Adrienne Wiatrak Parent Coordinator Kim Lucchesi Field Support Center Staff Member Nilda Kraft Other (Name and Title) Don Gray/School Counselor C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 1 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 986 Total number of ELLs 113 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.46% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): NONE If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 K 0 0 0 SP Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 1 1 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To asses early literacy skills, the general education ELLs are administered the Level Set exam, which is a component of the Achieve 3000 program. This exam is given three times a year in their literacy class. This exam includes a pre-, interim, and post-test that can be administered in approximately 15 minutes per assessment. This provides immediate reports that indicate student's progress and/or need for intervention. Upon reviewing this data, teachers create small groups and target specific areas of concern during the class Strategic Reading period. The assessments from Achieve 3000 align student's areas of intervention with the Common Core State Standards. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Students move their "lexile people" (student designed cutout people that are displayed across the classroom) after each benchmark to show their growth. A majority of our ELLs are considered below grade level and are “Beginning Readers.” In addition, all students in the school are given a Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment and Scantron assessment three times a year. These assessments are used to determine student’s reading level as well as to identify the skills that they have mastered and those that need improving. Results from such assessments are discussed during our inquiry meetings held monthly on Tuesday afternoons. This data tells us if we need to increase the use of our intervention program and helps us identify which students would benefit from such intervention. This data also gives the students their reading levels, so they can pick an appropriate book for independent reading time, and have an easy and fun way to track their reading growth. The SRI program also gives teacher’s reports and enables them to use these reports and data to create collaborative learning groups in the classroom. In addition, this data helps identify individual weaknesses of our ELLs so we can focus on particular strategies that will benefit them. For most of our ELLs, their lack of vocabulary is negatively affecting their comprehension, which is why we will be using our Academic Vocabulary Toolkit (AVT) within our push-in classes and have been encouraging all teachers to focus on academic vocabulary in their instruction to increase their academic language. Within our pull-out classes (of entering and emerging students) we are using a “Foundations of Reading Assessment", which is part of the National Geographic INSIDE curriculum. This assessment is primarily phonics-based and gives us an understanding of the students phonemic and phonological awareness. Parts of this assessment are administered individually so the results are specific for each student. Since the students in our pull-out classes are at the entering and expanding levels, this data is crucial for us in helping to understand where their weaknesses in phonics are so we can develop a strong foundation for reading. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Both ELA and Math classes have strategic instructional periods that focus on the students specific instructional needs. The teachers use formative assessments to assess the students strengths and weaknesses on a specific strategy and skill. Based on these findings, teachers will create small group instruction to reteach a strategy and skill to address the students needs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our program for ELLs by looking at the scores on the NYSESLAT, ELA, and Math as a quantifiable means of gauging students progress. In addition, we use our National Geographic INSIDE benchmarks and Achieve 3000 monitoring system. Achieve 3000 offers a Level Set test three times a year which then determines the students' lexile levels. Students also take Scantron Assessments to monitor their language and reading comprehension skills. The results determine the students’ reading levels as well as provide teachers with a breakdown of areas of strengths and weaknesses regarding reading and language arts skills. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ELLs are also given Math workbooks and dictionaries in their native language to accompany their English workbook. This increases the student’s comprehension and allows them to reinforce their English skills. The Math teachers use their Scantron data and state test breakdowns from September as a baseline to guide instruction in specific areas. We have noticed that a majority of our ELLs have scored a level 1 on the math state exam, while a few others have scored a 2. When we spoke to their Math teachers we noticed that ELLs had difficulties with word problems due to the vocabulary so we encourage math teachers to focus in on and isolate specific vocabulary throughout math lessons. We have provided them with the Academic Vocabulary Toolkit (AVT), and other resources, as well as encouraging the use of various graphic organizers such as the Frayer Model. Teachers can use these tools to introduce students to unfamiliar vocabulary. By using the Academic vocabulary Toolkit, students must apply the new word in speech through group and partner discussions, identify its meaning in reading, and use it in writing. Some students also translate words and definitions for themselves and their classmates to reinforce the meaning of 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  the academic vocabulary word. Both Math and Literacy classes have a Strategic period three days a week which allow teachers to focus on specific skills. Teachers begin the lesson with a mini-lesson and modeling using the targeted skill/strategy. Then the students are put into small groups to work collaboratively on the skill and will rotate into different groups so they can practice using the skill in various activities. Meanwhile, the teacher is working with a small group. By the end of every Strategic Reading period, the teacher is able to meet with many small groups. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The trend for several years is that our incoming sixth grade population includes a great deal of transitioning/expanding level students. We noticed these are students who have been in ENL since they were enrolled in kindergarten and turn into long-term ELLs as they progress through their first year at our school. Almost half of our incoming sixth grade population consists of Special Education students and this has been the trend for the past couple of years. This year’s incoming sixth grade population has a larger amount of transitioning/expanding level students than we have seen in recent years. The same can be said for our current eighth grade population. The seventh grade population has an increased number of newcomers, and is primarily made up of long-terms ELLs, who are either in the transitioning or expanding level. The eighth grade population (most of which are Special Ed. and/or long term ELLs or new comers) primarily fall within the expanding proficiency levels. Our long-term ELL population is large across the board and primarily consists of special education ELLs and students with a home language of Spanish. It was noticed that within our sixth grade entering and emerging population, the common areas of weakness are in speaking and writing. The most common weakness in our seventh grade entering and emerging population is their writing. The most common area of weakness in the eighth grade is also speaking and writing. We believe that the low scores in the writing modality attribute to the constant emphasis on summarizing and providing evidence from text, which is required for the ELA State Exam. On the NYSESLAT students were solely asked to interpret the text and respond in their own words. Our students’ need for more academic vocabulary also is a contributing factor to these areas of weakness. This shows that we need to continue to focus a great deal of attention on our ELLs’ skills, especially in Reading and Writing. This data reveals that we need to increase our reading and writing interventions that are already in place, and see if they can be modified to become more effective. In attempts to address this concern, we facilitated a school-wide Professional Development workshop about incorporating academic vocabulary into their daily instruction. NYSITELL results are analyzed for our newcomer students who are in the country less than three years as well as for students who are not progressing after more than 3 years of service. Over recent years, the trends show that the newcomer population tend to test at the entering or emerging levels. We have noticed that this applies to students within all grade levels (6,7,8). 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In June students were asked about their likes and dislikes of the Expeditionary Learning Curriculum, Math curriculum, etc. Our school used feedback from the students and all of the students mentioned that they'd prefer more writing activities while using Expeditionary Learning in ELA. Due to this, a Curriculum Writing team was formed and we created additional writing pieces to coincide with the curriculum. There are three parts to it, a pre-assessment, a mid-unit assessment, and a final performance task. The pre-assessment is a baseline written response and is used to determine a student's strengths and weaknesses as a writer. From this, the teacher can provide feedback and create groups to re-teach specific skills that the student needs assistance. After this, students are given their mid-unit writing performance task, which allows the cycle of small 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  group instruction to begin again. Finally the students are given their final writing piece, their "Performance Task" which showcases the student's improvement during the writing process. Upon realizing that the writing requirements have changed with the NYSESLAT, we are now including different types of writing responses for our ELL students. Now the students response's aren't as structured and they can respond in their own words. Students are using Achieve 3000 during their Strategic Reading periods, this provides them with different types of written prompts to non-fiction text. This program encourages students to use their own "voice" in writing and even begins and ends with a poll for students to take/share their opinion. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. The ENL organizational models implemented at I.S. 61 are a blended program of co-teaching with Literacy, and Science teachers in an integrated "push in" model and stand alone "push out" ENL instruction. Our students are grouped heterogeneously by grade.The sixth grade general ed. ELLs and some former ELLs are grouped into one designated class (they travel together), with all various proficiency levels. The entering and emerging ELLs from this class have one ENL teacher during their "non-academic" period for their "push out" instruction. This same ENL teacher pushes into their Literacy class 4 days a week. The sixth grade special ed. ELLs are in 2 different designated classes, according to their needs and IEPs). The second ENL teacher pushes into the Literacy class of the 2 self-contained special ed. classes who have emerging, transitioning, and expanding level ELLs, 4 times a week. The ENL teacher (the same one who pushes in to the special ed. Literacy classes) pushes in to the ICT Literacy class, 4 times a week. All of the entering and emerging special ed. ELLs from these 3 classes come to this same ENL teacher for their "non academic" period to receive their "push out" ENL instruction; this class is combined with the general ed. entering and emerging students. The seventh grade general ed. ELLs are grouped in one designated class (along with former ELLs). One ENL teacher pushes into their Literacy class four times a week. Another ENL teacher uses the push out model for seventh grade ELLs. The ENL teacher instructs general ed. seventh graders within the entering and emerging levels. Another ENL teacher services the seventh grade special ed. ELLs via push ins. The special ed. ELLs are in two different self-contained classes and one ICT class, according to their needs and IEP accommodations (one of these classes has a bilingual paraprofessional).This teacher services both self-contained classes in Literacy (with the same Literacy teacher) four times a week. The ICT students are serviced four times a week in Literacy. As for the 8th grade, the general ed. and special ed. ELLs receive ENL instruction via a push-out model. This class has a mixture of ELLs at the entering levels. One ENL teacher provides push-in services for the eighth grade general ed. ELLs, who are grouped within one designated class (alongside former ELLs). This teacher pushes into their Literacy class 4 times a week. This ENL teacher services the eighth grade special ed. ELLs. These ELLs are split among three classes, two self-contained and the other ICT. Both classes receive assistance from the ENL teacher when she pushes into their Literacy class four times a week. All entering eighth grade ELLs ( general ed.) have this same ENL teacher for their “non-academic” period to get their “pull- out” services. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. This is the first year that I.S.61 offers a Spanish/English Dual Language program. This program is currently available for our 6th grade general education ELLs. This class consists of current and former Spanish-speaking ELLs (of all different proficiency levels) and native English speaking students. In ELA, the teachers use ENIL and IRLA kits, from the American Reading Company, which includes independent reading and assessment materials. These kits are used during the Strategic Reading period which is three times a week. The students are first assessed in Spanish to determine their current reading Lexile level, and then they are assess in English to determine their current Lexile Level. Books, in Spanish and English, are available in the classroom library for students to read during their Strategic Reading period. The students in the Dual Language class have a bilingual teacher with them during ELA, Social Studies, and Science class periods. Students are provided with Spanish-English dictionaries that they can use during their classes. An same ENL teacher pushes into their Literacy class 4 days a week. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Once NYSESLAT scores became available in August, the ENL teachers met with the programmer to determine which students should be placed in the designated ENL classes, and which students also need to be in the pull out ENL class, as per their proficiency level. Entering level students receive a total of 360 minutes of ENL services per week; 180 of those minutes must be in a stand-alone ENL class while the other 180 minutes are in an integrated ENL/ELA class. Emerging students must receive 360 total minutes; 90 in stand-alone, and 180 in an integrated ENL/ELA and/or another 90 minutes that can be serviced in either stand alone or integrated (with ELA or any other content area). Transitioning has a total of 180 ENL minutes within an integrated ENL/ELA class. Expanding receives 180 total minutes in an integrated ENL/ELA class. Commanding receives 90 minutes of services in an integrated ENL/ELA or other content area class. Once classes are created, the school programmer provides the ENL teachers with a schedule of all sixth, seventh, and eighth grade classes that contain ELLs. The ENL teachers use this schedule to program their push-ins according to the mandated minutes that our students require. All entering and emerging students are also placed in a stand-alone ENL class during their non-academic periods. The programmer works closely with the ENL teachers and are in constant communication to ensure all students are in the correct class so, so all proficiency levels are receiving their mandated services. The ENL teachers co-teach with the 6th, 7th and 8th grade Literacy and Science (grade 7 honors class only) content area teachers to provide services to students of all levels. The content area teachers work with the ENL teacher to modify instruction for their ELL students. They plan their lessons based on when the ENL teacher pushes into their classroom and use “Google Drive” to work collaboratively to plan to meet the needs of all levels. As for the 6th grade Dual Language program, a majority of the students that applied were previously in a DL program from our feeder elementary schools. Those ELLs that are in the DL program are mostly within the expanding proficiency level with only three students falling within the entering/emerging levels. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  During the integrated model, content is being delivered from both the ENL teacher and the general ed/special ed teacher. In all classes, vocabulary is taught in English with the use of bilingual textbooks and glossaries. Bilingual dictionaries are provided to every content area classroom that has ENL students in them. As part of the co-teaching model, the ENL teachers provide lessons in vocabulary, grammar, pronunciation, reading strategies, oral fluency, text previews, and class projects which supplement and connect with the content being taught during instruction. ENL teachers address students’ individual needs through differentiated instruction within the co-teaching model. Exams/quizzes given in the content areas are modified due to students' proficiency levels. Word walls with pictures and Frayer models are used to help support the academic vocabulary being taught in all content areas. Entering and emerging ELLs are given content area (and regular) picture dictionaries that they carry with them throughout the day. All ENL Literacy classes (general ed and special ed) are using a Common Core aligned curriculum called Expeditionary Learning. During the stand alone model, ENL instruction is content based. All of the listening, speaking, reading and writing activities are connected to the Expeditionary Learning curriculum that is being taught in their Literacy classes. For this, ENL teachers use the National Geographic INSIDE curriculum and selects units based on its relation to the topics in Expeditionary Learning. In the 6th grade Dual Language classroom, ELA teachers are using ENIL and IRLA kits from the American Reading Company. Since the ENL teachers push in with the content area teachers, planning is a collaborative effort through afternoon meetings and sharing lessons through Google Drive, thereby allowing the ENL teachers to incorporate this material into their ENL lessons during their stand-alone period. Also, students approach the ENL teachers with specific topics they find difficult in their other classes. Since the stand-alone model is only used with our entering and emerging ELLs, the ENL teachers target any areas of weakness and use them to develop lessons that the whole class can benefit from. The same ENL strategies used within the integrated model are carried over to the stand-alone model as well. Listening exercises and videos are used to help develop students' understanding of more difficult content. Also, the use of technology is a large component of our stand-alone model. Using the SMARTboard makes the classroom interactive and makes the classroom student centered. It also gives everyone a chance to participate in the activity. In the ENL stand alone class there is a class set of iPads used to engage students in reading and annotating articles. We also purchase BoardWorks software in the 4 core subjects of ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science, which is highly engaging with visual cues, text, and audio content available to support all subject areas. Instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible and enrich language development: Our instruction is data driven and utilizes many ENL methodologies including TPR, modeling/scaffolding and direct instruction. With our Special Education students, the balanced literacy approach is incorporated, as well as direct instruction of vocabulary, using the Frayer model, and constant reinforcement of academic language. Most academic classes are set up for the workshop model, in which the desks are set up in groups of four or six. The ELA class is split into two periods, once for Expeditionary Learning and the second period is for Strategic Reading (3 times a week). All Strategic Reading classes begin with a mini lesson on a specific strategy followed by independent reading and completing a response to the reading. The teacher takes a small group aside for either shared or guided reading. The general education ELL classes use Achieve 3000 during this time. For the Expeditionary Learning curriculum, there are a series of quick writes that help scaffold and lead up to the unit assessment. Each unit assessment is an "On Demand" writing piece which assesses their comprehension of the skills and topics taught throughout the unit. In the stand-alone ENL classes, we use the “Four Square” writing model which is a very visual graphic organizer that makes the writing process more organized and comprehensible for ELLs. We incorporate the four square writing model throughout most of the ELLs' content area classes. The workshop model takes many things into consideration in order to be effective. In the reading workshop, we focus on appropriate book selection according to student’s lexile reading level (as well as guidelines for abandoning a book), a classroom environment in which furniture is arranged so that students can sit comfortably and see the book s/he is reading, and classrooms which are print rich and have many materials so that students will be engaged and immersed in the story they are reading. All ELA classrooms are stocked with a Common Core library filled with informational text of various levels and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  topics. For entering and emerging students, bilingual and picture books are offered, as well the use of audio books in the classroom. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? After completing the registration and interview process, eligible students take the NYSITELL. Spanish speaking students are administered the Spanish LAB. For new students who speak languages other than Spanish, a translator or staff member who speaks their language, is utilized to ask them basic questions in their native language. Students are also allowed to write their native language, when doing homework or answering “quick write” assignments. Students must use their translators or dictionaries to translate their native language writing into English. Students are also can be given the “Scantron” Math assessment in Spanish (which is the primary home language of our ELLs). Students can also take the Science and Social Studies MOSLs in their native language and interpreters are hired to grade these MOSLs when they are administered throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Plan for SIFE: At William A. Morris Intermediate School 61, a small number of our ELLs are SIFE students. For these students, we try to provide assistance in areas in which they may have deficiencies, in collaboration with guidance counselors to assist their transition into the school and classroom setting. We often use laptop computers, along with several computer programs, such as “Step by Step” and “Side by Side” which address fluency and basic literacy skills (such as phonics) that students with interrupted formal education often lack. Listening and writing skills are addressed, as well as answering questions about instructional videos that require student response. We also have INSIDE “Fundamentals A” that is used with SIFE students who have a limited amount of English Proficiency. We also use other instructional materials and supplies such as audio visual materials, books with accompanying tapes, graphics, picture dictionaries and stationary supplies to be used in the classroom. By using resources such as NYSESLAT scores, SCANTRON, DRP, and ELA/ELL assessment results, ELL Periodic Assessment and LevelSet/ Benchmark assessments, we can see the strengths and weaknesses of individual students, and plan instruction accordingly. b. Plan for newcomers: We have approximately 15 newcomers at I.S. 61 (0-3 years of service). We address their needs by the following: We always invite our newcomers to participate in our after school programs. We offer computer and laptop assistance, where they can use special software geared at increasing English language proficiency. In our stand-alone model our INSIDE Fundamentals Level A comes with a textbook, workbook, writer’s workout, and various independent reading books related to the topics, in addition to an online tracking system. The independent reading books can be used within a guided reading group and also during independent reading time. Newcomers and beginners also use picture dictionaries that are uploaded onto laptops for individual or paired use. Students also utilized a website call www.ESLKIDSLAB.com which provides and audio component and practice worksheets. Contact with mainstream teachers is also a large part of our newcomer plan at I.S. 61. The ENL teacher provides mainstream teachers with training and ENL resources, as well as specialized materials such as picture dictionaries, bilingual dictionaries, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  and simplified textbooks related to the topic they are teaching. The co-teaching model allows the ENL teacher the opportunity to take a small group of newcomers for specialized mini lessons to teach the basics, such as ‘survival English’ for brand new students. We try to assign a ‘buddy’ to our newcomers within the first week, which is a responsible classmate who usually speaks the same native language. The ENL teacher also provides the mainstream teacher with learning strategies for the lesson they are doing as often as possible. These strategies and scaffolds are uploaded to Google Docs during collaborative planning time. These strategies may differ between new arrivals, and ELLs who have been in the country for several years. They are provided with activities that are more content embedded as well as cognitively less demanding for newer students. To help make a smooth transition into an American school system, the ENL teacher provides newcomers with various beginning level workbooks, such as “This is Me” by Elizabeth Claire (Alta Book Publishers). Books 1 and 2 are used for these newcomers to help improve their beginning English skills which include basic phonics and vocabulary. These books also help to develop their basic writing and conversational skills. Picture dictionaries along with their workbook counterpart also help develop their basic vocabulary, both social and academic. Entering/ newcomers are given differentiated homework which helps support their need for basic English skills in their ENL stand-alone class. We also provide translators for parents, at our Parent Teacher conferences. Yet another role of the Parent Coordinator is to provide general information regarding the ENL program, as well as more specific details on the nature of each classroom's curriculum. Translations of documents and interpreters are provided for each language. Parents are given the opportunity to ask questions about the workings of the classroom and additional resources provided to each child. For our newcomers, we always encourage writing in their first language in the beginning of their transition in order to reduce some of the frustration often felt when they are unable to participate in classroom tasks. They also are encouraged to draw or make a story map to communicate what they are trying to express. It is our goal to support newcomers by providing them with a framework that connects them to the work being done by the rest of the class. We do as much as we can to help make them feel comfortable and secure so they are willing to participate and interact. c. Plan for 4-6 year ELLs: We try to address the individual needs of our 4-6 year ELLs by utilizing the NYSESLAT data to find the strengths and weaknesses of each student. By using resources such as the DRP, ELL Periodic Assessment, and INSIDE benchmark assessments we can see the strengths and weaknesses of individual students, and plan instruction accordingly. Students are assigned instructional resources with Scantron to help build up skills in areas needed. Our 4-6 year ELLs again scored mostly at the expanding level of the NYSESLAT. However, Reading/Writing scores were lower than Listening/Speaking. We are continuing to utilize several instructional interventions to address this, such as: • 4-Square Writing Method in all 3 grades, for both General and Special Education ELLs. • Frayer Model vocabulary instruction method in all 3 grades, for both General and Special Education ELLs. • Use of more Spanish/bilingual materials, including library books, dictionaries and subject glossaries, and bilingual texts in Math and Social Studies, to boost literacy skills in the native language. Each student will be given a bilingual dictionary so that they can use it within all of their classes, as well as, for assistance with their homework. • National Geographic’s INSIDE text and workbooks in all 3 grades and a blended Achieve 3000 computer and Lexile level tracking system for ELLs in all three grades. Academic Vocabulary Toolkit is used in all content area to reinforce the high utility academic vocabulary. Collaborative Strategic Reading (CSR) is used within ELA classes and fosters group work for ELLs while reading complex text. The students are in groups of four and are each student is given a specific roles. The students chunk the text and read sections aloud to each other. Students then find the main idea and important details of each section along with deciphering the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  meanings of unknown words. Strategies such as scaffolding, building schema, inferencing, using context clues, making connections, etc. are used in both their ENL and content area classes. These strategies will give them that extra ‘push’ needed to score commanding on the NYSESLAT. Our ELLs serviced for 4-6 years, are making great strides with the “READ 180” program, which (in conjunction with Expeditionary Learning) is a system that tracks Reading Lexile scores through leveled independent reading books, and an individualized computer program that assigns activities in speaking, listening, reading comprehension, vocabulary, spelling, and grammar. We hope this will prevent these students from becoming Long Term ELLs. d. Plan for Long-Term ELLs: Our plan for LTE includes a variety of strategies. Upon closer analysis of their NYSESLAT, ELA and Math scores, and SCANTRON scores we determined that a majority of our Long Term ELLs were testing at higher proficiency levels in Listening and Speaking than in Reading and Writing. We are currently in the process of analyzing the NYSESLAT, ELA, and SCANTRON data to determine which specific literacy skills were more problematic for ELLs across the board. This will in turn inform our instruction and test preparation to include more emphasis on those skills in our academic planning and curriculum mapping. For all of our general education ELLs, we utilize a program called “Achieve 3000”. This program is a support for independent reading for the Literacy classes to which the ENL teacher pushes in. “Achieve 3000” is a differentiated reading intervention program that contains non-fiction articles for students to read and respond to based on their Lexile Level. This program is used in the workshop model in conjunction with Expeditionary Learning. Teachers begin the period with a mini-lesson based on a specific skill and then students are assigned articles where they will practice utilizing the skill. Achieve 3000's articles contain comprehension questions, vocabulary, skill reinforcement, and writing prompts that coincide with the article. The program automatically differentiates articles and questions based on the student's Lexile Level. Articles are also available in Spanish. The program meets the needs of struggling readers whose reading achievement is below proficient level. It also directly addresses individual needs through differentiated instruction, adaptive and instructional software, high-interest literature, and direct instruction in reading, writing, and vocabulary skills. These are skills with which all our Long-Term ELLs seem to require the most help. We use Blended Read 180 Lexile/SRI assessment program incorporating INSIDE textbooks and workbooks. We use several graphic organizers, including the Frayer model for academic vocabulary instruction. We use the 4 square planning page for the writing process, which is carried out also in most content area classes. We also use Smartboard technologies to keep the class interactive and student centered. The ENL teachers use ENL focused websites, such as Readwritethink and Dave's ESL Cafe to keep the students engaged for more difficult areas such as grammar. The SMARTboard is used for listening activities/assessments, to show power points, to view videos and photos that help scaffold content and vocabulary that will be discussed, and even to give class assessments. e. Former ELLs: Former ELLs are kept in their class with the other ELL peers, and receive instruction from teachers who already differentiate their instruction for ELLs. After ENL students reach commanding level on the NYSESLAT, some are kept in an ESL class where their academic performance is continually monitored. All former ELLs receive 90 minutes of push-in instruction from the grade ENL teacher in their Literacy, Science or Social Studies class. We also work with their guidance counselors, team leaders, subject teachers and assistant principals to ensure they are transitioning smoothly, if they were taken out of the ENL class. The former ELLs are also offered extra materials, resources, and supports to the teacher of that content area if the need arises, and also gets the same testing accommodations. Some materials and resources may include native language resources, the addition of visual representations of information, and the sharing of ENL techniques in the classroom such as TPR, use of Frayer models, and the Academic Vocabulary Toolkit. If it becomes evident that transitional students are struggling in any of their academic classes, we then come up with a plan to 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  help the students through A.I.S. services (small group instructions), tutorial services (when available), or a conference with the assistant principal as to whether an inter-class transfer is necessary. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In the beginning of each year, the ENL teachers work with the Special Ed Coordinator and IEP case managers to ensure that all students are properly placed in the correct setting. They view each IEP to make sure that the proper students are given a bilingual paraprofessional, if needed. Speech therapists as well as occupational therapists are in close contact with ENL teachers when creating their schedules to ensure there is no conflict with providing services. The ENL teachers create a list of students’ general and testing accommodations as a guide for modifications. ELL-SWDs also use Expeditionary Learning in their Literacy classrooms,which is a common core curriculum that is grade and age appropriate. Teachers of ELL-SWDs tend to use an abundance of leveled graphic organizers and include sentence starters for their students. All scaffolds and leveled graphic organizers for Expeditionary Learning are provided by ENL teachers who upload the documents into Google Drive. Cloze activities are also utilized to focus on academic vocabulary and content. We have also provided these teachers with worksheets from Kate Kinsella’s Academic Vocabulary Toolkit, which they can use when introducing new vocabulary to students. These teachers use technology such as Smartboards and iPads to provide students with visuals and examples of new vocabulary so that students can make connections to the new content. Students are familiar with using Frayer models for vocabulary reinforcement. In addition, bilingual dictionaries and content area picture dictionaries are present in all classrooms for students to refer to if needed. Paraprofessionals are also present in Special Education classrooms to further assist students, allowing them the opportunity to receive additional help from an adult. Some ELL-SWDs are in classrooms with a bilingual para (if deemed necessary as per their IEP) so content can be easily translated if needed. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school provides students with additional time and resources (differentiated graphic organizers, visuals, bilingual glossaries, methods of presentation [questions read, directions read, etc.]) when completing tasks that are aligned to the Common Core curriculum. The ENL teachers meet with the designated teacher that completes their IEP to provide them with information, as well as receive information about the student’s goals, academic strengths and weaknesses. Content-area special ed. teachers are expected to adhere to the pacing calendar that all general education teachers are to follow. Students are integrated within their non-academic periods; regardless of whether they are general education, SWD, or an ELL. ENL students who are in ICT classes are always encouraged by the ENL teachers to be paired with general ed. students. To determine which ELLs are in ICT classes, the Special Ed. Coordinator and IEP case managers are in constant contact with their Team Leaders to ensure they are successful in their placement. They use Scantron Data as well as report card grades to monitor their success and academic progress. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We are able to determine the level of literacy for the Spanish-speaking students using the results of the Spanish Language Assessment Battery (LAB). These scores help us to determine whether a student's difficulty with reading is due to deficiencies in language or comprehension. Using this data, we can help to drive instruction by focusing on our Entering and Emerging ELLs in ELA and Math. This can be achieved in many ways. Currently, we have several programs in place to help students with reading, such as Achieve 3000 (during Strategic Reading periods), and Moby Max a computer component to our Math curriculum. There are several opportunities afforded to all of the students with a special focus on our long term ELLs at William A. Morris Intermediate School. We offer tutorial services in math and literacy via small group instruction. We also have a special after school program 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  called Enrich, Succeed, Learn (E.S.L.), which is geared for remediation and improvement in literacy. This program runs from January to April. In addition, our ELA and other content teachers work collaboratively in many ways with the ENL teacher, through professional development meetings. This assists them in becoming acquainted with ENL strategies and techniques. In order to foster collaboration between teachers, the Literacy department uses Google Drive to create power points for their Expeditionary Learning lessons. All of the teachers can access and utilize these power points and can also modify it, if needed, for their students. The ENL teachers assist in creating these lessons and provide teachers with effective strategies that will assist ELLs in the classroom. The ENL teachers are also present during team meetings to discuss students’ academic and social progress, as well as meetings held by the literacy coach for literacy teachers. In addition, the ENL teacher meets informally with classroom teachers on a regular basis. Class and student observations are held routinely by the ENL teacher in the content area classroom. Teachers are always welcome to visit the ENL teachers' classroom to borrow materials and books. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This school year our ELLs will take the Periodic Assessment and DRP (along with all students at IS61). Additional writing tasks were created and implemented into the Expeditionary Learning curriculum. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students are able to participate in all school programs, such as robotics, step, etc. Every year ELLs are encouraged to enroll in the “Enrich, Succeed, Learn” (ESL) after school program. This twelve week program focuses on preparing ELLs for important state tests such as the ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT. Teachers involved in this program are: an ENL teacher and three Literacy teachers. The Literacy teachers are certified in Orton-Gilingham, Just Words, and Wilson intervention programs. A bilingual paraprofessional is also present during the ENL program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The Achieve 3000 program, the Academic Vocabulary Toolkit, CSR Toolkit, bilingual materials in Social Studies/Math/Science, the INSIDE curriculum series (for entering/emerging ELLs), 4-Square Writing method, Frayer Model vocabulary folders, and Academic Conversation worksheets. Word walls with pictures are used in the content area classes. Phonics based activities are used for some of our beginner level students, as well as our Heinle Picture Dictionary textbooks and workbooks. Using the BrianPop ESL website, along with other interactive Smartboard lessons, help to create a student centered environment where students are reading, writing, listening and speaking. For lower level students, bilingual references and picture dictionaries are always readily available to them. In the content area classes, the ENL teachers instruct students with different ELL strategies and techniques, such as journals, graphic organizers, building schema, modeling/scaffolding, etc. These strategies and techniques are also used by all the content area teachers with ELLs even if the ENL teacher is not present. Building on the students’ CALP is one of the focuses of the content area classes as well as incorporating literacy. In content area classes ELLs make connections to the academic language being taught to them on a daily basis. The 6th grade science book is also on a CD, so the teacher can use the Smartboard to model for students exactly how to use the book and what is to be read. Technology, when available, is a great resource for our ELLs for the content area classes. Content area classes can also use the Boardworks program as an interactive teaching tool. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  Support materials include bilingual dictionaries and content area picture dictionaries. The Science textbooks in each grade contain bilingual glossaries, as well as Spanish workbooks and chapter summaries. Students are given access to bilingual dictionaries (Spanish, Bengali, Albanian, Chinese and Arabic) and glossaries similar to those used on the state exam in their core subject classrooms. Students also have access to Math workbooks in Spanish, if needed. Prior to each vocabulary/grammar lesson, explanations and equivalents in home languages are researched for presentation in class to students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Skills that are being taught in the ELA curriculum are also reinforced in the pull out classes using the INSIDE curriculum. The INSIDE curriculum, a literacy program designed for ELLs, is geared toward a middle school demographic. Each reading selection is based on the anticipated reading levels of middle school students and is Common Core aligned. The specific skills taught in each level of the INSIDE curriculum mirror the CCSS and the skills taught in their ELA curriculum (Expeditionary Learning). The “Fundamentals Volume 2” level is utilized as a supplement with newcomers at the entering level for all three grades in the pull out classes, as well as in small group (in the ELA classroom when the ENL teacher pushes in). This particular book focuses on newcomer English that helps them become acclimated to the American culture and school system. The Fundamentals series comes with fiction and non-fiction books that can be used for a guided reading group exposing to students to books that are similar to those they will use in their ELA class, but at their reading level. All ELL content area teachers are given students lexile levels and NYSESLAT level, so they can give students reading material (when used independently) that are at the students grade level, so they can be involved no matter what proficiency level they are. This is reinforced by the ENL teachers when they give their ENL workshops during professional development. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The Achieve 3000 program, the Academic Vocabulary Toolkit, bilingual materials in Social Studies/Math/Science, the INSIDE curriculum series (for entering/emerging ELLs), 4-Square Writing method, Frayer Model vocabulary folders, and Academic Conversation worksheets. Word walls with pictures are used in the content area classes; spelling tests on the word walls are given once a week in some classes. Phonics based activities are used for some of our beginner level students, as well as our Heinle Picture Dictionary textbooks and workbooks. Using the BrainPopESL website, along with other interactive Smartboard lessons, help to create a student centered environment where students are reading, writing, listening and speaking. For lower level students, bilingual references and picture dictionaries are always readily available to them. In the content area classes, the ENL teachers instruct students with different ELL strategies and techniques, such as journals, graphic organizers, building schema, modeling/scaffolding, etc. These strategies and techniques are also used by all the content area teachers with ELLs even if the ENL teacher is not present. Building on the students’ CALP is one of the focuses of the content area classes as well as incorporating literacy. In content area classes ELLs make connections to the academic language being taught to them on a daily basis. The 6th grade science book is also on a CD, so the teacher can use the Smartboard to model for students exactly how to use the book and what is to be read. Technology, when available, is a great resource for our ELLs for the content area classes. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The ENL teachers attend the registration dates over the summer to assist in enrolling students who are eligible for ENL services. The ENL teacher and School Programmer meet in August, after registration, to identify newcomers in order to compose a schedule for administration of the NYSITELL. The parents of newly admitted students, once identified as ELLs, are required to come up to the school for a parent orientation given by both of the ENL teachers and an interpreter if needed. That is when they watch the Parent Video describing their options, and they fill out the necessary documents (parent survey and program selection form). The orientations are scheduled according to the parents availability. In the beginning of the school year, families are invited to attend Curriculum night for a chance to meet with their child’s teachers and to comprehend the content that their child will be learning throughout the school year. All staff members, guidance counselors, paraprofessionals, and administrators are present during Curriculum night. Bilingual paraprofessionals 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  are present during this so that they can translate information to parents and relay messages back and forth between parents and the staff. Three times a year our school hosts Family Fun Night which is open to the families of ELLs and Special ed. students. This event is hosted by the assistant principal, Dennis Whitford, and parent coordinator, Kim Lucchesi. Families are encouraged to attend this free event as another opportunity for parents to meet with their child’s teacher and build stronger relationships between the school and the home. It is a good way to keep in touch with parents throughout the year, and enables newly enrolled students at any point of the year to be able to partake in such activities (since this night occurs over the course of the year). Family Fun Night always has a theme that relates to American culture and customs pertaining to that time of year. Bilingual paraprofessionals are usually in attendance and can be of assistance for translating if needed. It also gives students the ability to express themselves in a creative environment that may not be seen in the classroom. New ELLs are also paired up with a friendly student in their class who speaks the same native language that can assist these newcomers no matter when they enroll in our school. Our ELLs have become comfortable with welcoming newcomers to their class, and are expected to be role models to our newcomers and assist them in transitioning well. The ENL teachers make it a point to stay in contact with newcomers’ team leaders to ensure a smooth transition. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our school offers American Sign Language and Italian as a language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? The dual language model used is the side-by-side model. The enrolled students are balanced between native English speakers and native Spanish speakers. The students receive 50% of their academic classes in English and 50% of their academic classes in Spanish. The academic classes taught in English and Spanish are Social Studies, Science, and ELA. Math is taught in English, but students have access to bilingual dictionaries and resources. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development is ongoing. ENL teachers meet with subject area, Special Education and common branch teachers and Paraprofessionals at the start of the academic year in order to disseminate bilingual classroom materials for the teachers of ELLs. Also distributed are two notices of all resources available to ELL students and ELL teachers; this notice is given to teachers as well as assistant principals and supervisors. Every Monday, there are professional development meetings where teachers receive strategies and routines to implement into their instruction. These PDs are usually given by the Inquiry Team, PBIS Core Team, or the ENL Department. The theme of the PDs depend on the feedback and suggestions of the teachers. Teachers who attend workshops outside of the building are usually asked to turn-key the information they received to other staff members during this time. In addition, teachers are allotted time on Mondays to collaborate as a department (by grade), using Google Drive to share power point presentations and lesson plans. This is where the ELA teachers are given time to collaboratively plan with their ENL teachers. It gives teachers of each department time to discuss their plans and make sure they are all on the same page, and are covering the same 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  curriculum topics. Also, every Tuesday afternoon, after parent engagement, there is either a team meeting, grade meeting or department/inquiry meeting for all teachers. This gives all content area teachers and teams collaborate to discuss their needs and concerns. This time also gives the ENL teachers time to get feedback and give support to those teachers of ELLs that do not normally plan with the ENL teachers and do not get their push in services. The rotation of these three meetings throughout the month gives the teachers of these grades an opportunity to share ideas, strategies and activities with one another. It also is a great time to discuss issues and concerns they are having about specific topics or students. This gives the ENL teachers time to participate and share their particular ideas and strategies, as well as to find out what topics are going to be covered in the upcoming weeks. This PD gives us time to plan and share information with teachers we don’t get to see on a daily basis. ENL teachers attended a refresher PD on CSR (Collaborative Strategic Reading), on March 15, 2017 located at 83 Maiden Lane, NY (The Consortium for Workers Education) from 9am-3pm. During the PD, the ENL teachers shared any questions they had about using CSR and received feedback from other educators. ENL teachers also learned the best methods of using CSR in different subject areas. During the summer On Monday, October 2, 2017, ENL and ELA teachers that use Achieve 3000 received a Professional Development at IS61 from 8:00am-2:00pm. The Curriculum and Implementation Manager facilitated the workshop and provided teachers with strategies and best practices in implementation of the program in strategic reading. On October 20, 2017, the ENL teacher and the two teachers in the dual language program will receive a professional development workshop based on the dual language curriculum. This will be led by a representative from the American Reading Company, which is where the materials for the ELA classroom were purchased. This professional development will be at I.S.61 from 8:00am-2:00pm. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Being that many ELLs have difficulties comprehending academic and content based vocabulary, the ENL teachers facilitated “Academic Vocabulary Supports” professional development workshops. These workshops addressed the importance of teaching academic vocabulary in their classes in order to foster deeper comprehension. The ENL teachers supplied staff with numerous strategies for explicit vocabulary instruction along with tips for creating scaffolds and graphic organizers. ENL teachers emphasized the importance of using Frayer Models, Four Square, and other graphic organizers as means of teaching new vocabulary. These practices assist ELLs as they encounter difficult content As means of making staff familiar with their ELL student’s capabilities, we provide them with the ELLs' NYSESLAT level and encourage them to analyze the breakdown of the Scantron results. These results are discussed in further detail when the ENL teachers give their first PD on different strategies for all the ELL levels, as well as ideas to give their classroom a more multicultural atmosphere. Our school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 through our weekly professional development workshops. These workshops are held on Monday afternoons and are usually facilitated by other staff members such as those on the PBIS team, Inquiry team, ENL teachers, etc. We also encourage staff members to attend the various workshops offered throughout the city during the current school year. We recently informed staff via email of a profession development called "ELLevating" (Conference on Effective Instruction for English Language Learners). This is offered on October 14, 2017, from 8:00-4:15 am at the UFT headquarters in Manhattan. When teachers attend professional development workshops they must sign in (as proof of attendance) and the payroll secretary, Susan Marsh, (who is in charge of documenting PD hours) receives a copy of this list to add to the PD binder. The 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  teachers who attend these workshops are also encouraged to keep the information they received with them such as agendas and power point presentations (as proof) and as a useful tool when planning their instruction. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We involve parents in the Literacy (and ENL pull-out) curriculum by sending home bilingual letters to parents of ELLs informing them of the content and theme of a new unit the class is currently working on, as well as suggestions on how they can help their child in the areas of reading, writing, listening, and speaking. Parents are also invited to the school, for an ENL Conference, to meet with their child’s ENL teacher to discuss their child's language and academic progress. This is a great time for parents to inquire about their child’s progress and address any concerns. The ENL teachers review the process to attain proficiency, an overview of the NYSESLAT, servicing, testing accommodations, etc. Parents are notified that they can arrange a meeting with the ENL teacher at any time to discuss the progress report if it is not completely understood. These progress reports are in the process of getting translated. Any goals that students create in ENL class must be signed by the parent. In addition to notices, the ENL teachers use the Translation and Interpretation Unit phone line, provided by the NYCDOE, to contact the parents of their ELL students to hold phone meetings/conferences as well if the parents work schedule is not accommodating. Phone calls are made to notify parents of their child's progress as well as any other concerns. Teachers are allotted time on Tuesday afternoons to contact (via phone, e-mail, or PupilPath) or meet with parents. During Curriculum Night parents are given their Pupil Path information and are encouraged to use it daily and as a preferred method of contact with teachers. It is also a great way for parents to be an active participant in their child’s education, especially since HW assignments for many classes are posted on Pupil Path and their attendance and grades can be monitored daily, so parents do not have to wait until parent teacher conferences to find out how their child is doing. Pupil Path is able to be accessed in multiple languages. Bilingual paraprofessionals are in attendance for the PTCs to assist in translating. Letters are sent home (in parent’s preferred language) so they can pick from an option of dates and times (on Tuesday afternoons) to meet with the ENL teachers to discuss their child’s progress and any concerns the teacher or parent may have. If a parent does not return the form, then the ENL teachers will reach out to the parent via phone and PupilPath to set up a time for the annual meeting to take place. During these meetings parents are given their child’s NYSESLAT scores, as well as their lexile scores so they can help their children pick out appropriate books and be aware of where there child is currently at, and what can be done at home to help them progress. Our school is now encouraging families to use an app called Remind 101. This app allows staff to easily provide families with important school news. Teachers can create "groups" based on their classes and contact parents/guardians about specific updates. Families are also able to contact their child's teacher through the Remind 101 app. This makes communication easier for parents. Kim Lucchesi, our Parent Coordinator is available to help our parents, especially those of ELLs with any questions pertaining to the health requirements needed to attend any New York City public school. She helps to distribute information with regard to health insurance, as well as the availability of preventative health clinics in our area. Our Parent Coordinator can also help parents if translation services are needed such as for parent conferences or IEP meetings. This can be done through three way phone calls with a member of the translation unit, or by arranging for a translation unit member to visit the school. Another activity to increase parental involvement is "Family Fun Night" which is extended to our ELLs and SWD population. Family Fun Night gives the staff an opportunity to meet with parents in an informal setting. This also gives the parents an opportunity to meet with teachers and participate in activities and socialize with one another. Family Fun Night occurs four times throughout the year, depending on funding., this incorporates a different theme for each event including food, crafts, sports activities and videos. Teachers and parents can communicate and connect on a more personal level during these activities. Spanish translators attend this event to further assist in communication. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school encourages the use of PupilPath by students and their parents/guardians. PupilPath fosters immediate communication between the teacher and parents being that parents can access the website through the Internet or even as an app on their smart phone. Parents can track their child’s attendance, assignments and grades through this, as well as send messages to their child’s teacher. We have noticed that parents of ELLs appreciate that PupilPath can be translated into their home language, which also make it more approachable for them. Family Fun Night is a popular event that parents of ELLs like to attend because it is in an informal setting and they are welcome to bring their family to meet the staff. Literacy Night is also a great opportunity to promote family literacy since the invitation is extended to all parents. All attendees are encouraged to wear pajamas, and can all be an active participant in the activities of the evening. Once a student “tests out” of ENL according to their NYSESLAT results, a small ceremony is held to celebrate their achievement and hard work. Students receive a certificate and parents are invited and encouraged to attend. In addition, parents are invited to attend an introductory session about the “Enrich, Succeed, Learn” ENL after school program. During this, the format and purpose of the NYSESLAT is explained to parents, with assistance from bilingual staff members, if necessary. Examples of questions from the four modalities of the NYSESLAT will be presented to the parents so that they can thoroughly comprehend the requirements of the test. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NONE 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Susan Tronolone, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: William A. Morris School DBN: 31R061 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Susan Tronolone Title Principal Angela Chiappone Assistant Principal Kim Lucchesi Parent Coordinator Francesca Grandinetti ENL/Bilingual Teacher Adrienne Wiatrak Parent Vanessa Cucuzza/ ENL Teacher/Subject Area Steven Rose/ ENL Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Christine Cusato School Counselor Anthony Lodico Nilda Kraft Monica Ekelund Don Gray NONE Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Service Coordinator and Compliance Performance Specialist Other Related Service Provider Other School Counselor Other NONE Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 N/A N/A 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 NONE 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 061 School Name: William A. Morris IS61 Superintendent: Vincenza Gallas The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator & Parent Coordinator Yes yes Kim Lucchesi * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home Language surveys were used to determine the types of languages spoken at I.S.61. We have determined that 88.5% of our ELLs are Spanish speaking. The other 11.5% of ELLs create a population of other languages such as Arabic, French, Bengali, Chinese, Albanian, Dutch, and Turkish. In the beginning of the year parents must fill out a form indicating the preferred language that they would like to receive information from the school. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  Teachers are also provided with the home languages of the ELLs and all students in their class. They are provided of a copy of their classes RAPL report. This allows teachers when contacting parents via the translation line and/or sending notices home. Emergency Contact cards and Parent Surveys are translated into the preferred languages of each student. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 700 250 8 20 English Spanish Bengali Other (Arabic, Albanian, Chinese, Gurma, Turkish, Urdu) 71.7% 25.6% .81% 2.04% 700 250 8 20 71.7% 25.6% .81% 2.04% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include - Parent Handbook -Parent Bill of Rights Families Beginning of the year procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In order to open lines of communication with parents/guardians that speak languages other than English, our school utilizes a translation and interpretation unit provided by the NYCDOE Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy. It is available for over-the-phone service to assist in communicating with non-English speaking parents and families. In addition, if there is written material that must be translated into other languages we can fill out a Translation 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  Informative letters/flyers regarding: -Family Fun Night -Curriculum Night -testing information monthly PupilPath Monthly - after school programs -parent-teacher conferences monthly Request Form, which is found on the DOE website, then we can e-mail it to translations@schools.nyc.gov. We submit the Translation Request Form at least 3 weeks prior to when the forms need to be submitted. Our school translates the Parent Handbook, which is to be given out in the beginning of the year. Notices for events such as Family Fun Night, Curriculum Night, and testing information are translated into languages preferred by each student’s parent/guardian (using the Translation & Interpretation Unit). In addition, our school uses PupilPath to communicate with parents/guardians, this informs them of their child’s attendance, grades, homework, and allows parents/guardians to e-mail their child’s teacher. The entire website is capable of being translated into the parent/guardian’s preferred language which makes it simple for them to navigate. Notices for events such as parent-teacher conferences, after-school programs such as our “Enrich, Succeed, Learn” ENL program, are translated into languages preferred by each student’s parent/guardian (using the Translation & Interpretation Unit). 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84 Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Curriculum Night September 20, 2018 September 20, 2018 We hire an interpreter, call the translation line or have a bilingual staff member present for the meeting. Parents are notified of this event by automated phone calls which are set up by the school to call houses and translate messages. November 27, 2018 (12-2:00, 4:30-7:30) March 26, 2019 Parents are notified of this event by automated phone calls which are set up by the school to call houses and translate messages. Parent Teacher Conferences (12-2:00, 4:30-7:30) May 16, 2019 (5:00-8:00PM) We can hire an interpreter, call the translation line or have a bilingual staff member present for the conferences. Parents are notified of this event by automated phone calls which are set up by the school to call houses and translate messages. October 25, 2018 (6:00 pm) Family Fun Night December 12, 2018 (6:00PM) May 30, 2019 (6:00PM) Parents must fill out a permission slip to attend Family Fun Night. Once the school receives the permission slips, they can cross reference the family with their preferred language in order to effectively communicate with the parents. If necessary, we can hire an interpreter or have a bilingual staff member present for the event. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85  Parent Engagement Meeting Tuesdays (2:00-2:40PM) Meetings can be arranged via PupilPath (which can translate messages into other languages) or by contacting the school/teacher. Automated phone calls can be set up by the school to call houses and translate messages, if needed. We can hire an interpreter, call the translation line or have a bilingual staff member present for the meeting. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We ensure that families in need of language access services do not feel restricted from calling the school due to their language barrier. If we receive a call from a parent/guardian that speaks another language we will either locate a staff member who speaks that language to translate or contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit to communicate with the parent/guardian. Also we can send home important messages to families through the automated phone calls. This system translates the message into many languages. Parent/Guardians will receive the phone call in whichever language they preferred to receive information in, whether it be English, Spanish, Arabic, etc. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In order to ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, we guide the staff to the Department of Education website. On the website important information is provided (in each of the covered languages) in regards to making parents' aware of their rights to translation and interpretation services and it explains how to access these services. We provide teachers with the RCPL, Adult Preferred Language Report, so that they are aware of their students' parent/guardian's preferred language of contact. Teachers are also given the Translation and Interpretation phone number and e-mail address so that messages can be translated for families. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 SCEP-FL 86  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The welcome poster and Language Identification guide are present at the front desk so they are seen when parents first enter the building. Parents can identify the language that they speak by pointing to the Language ID guide. If needed, a translator will be contacted to speak to the parent; either a bilingual staff member or a phone call will be made to the over-the-phone translation services, provided by the DOE. The Parent Coordinator/Language Access Coordinator also provides translated versions of important documents for parents/guardians that speak languages other than English. The Language Access Coordinator provides each parent/guardian whose primary language is not English and who require language assistance services, with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities. This clarifies the parent/guardian's rights regarding accessing translation and interpretation services. We obtain the translated versions of this document through the DOE website. At any parent engagement event, we have translators readily available and will also access the Translation and Interpretation Unit, if necessary. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents/Guardians complete a Parent Survey , in their native language, at the end of every year. It asks them about forms of communication with staff and whether or not they were contacted in their preferred language. Parents will be contacted every marking period, through PupilPath with a series of questions. PupilPath translates content into the parent/guardian's preferred language. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 87 
