 31R064 School Name: GAYNOR MCCOWN EXPEDITIONARY LEARNING SCHOOL Principal: TRACI FREY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Gaynor McCown Expeditionary Learning School 353100011064 9-12 100 Essex Drive, Staten Island, NY 10314 School Number (DBN): 31R064 718-370-6950 Phone Number: 718-370-6960 Fax: Traci Frey tfrey@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 31 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Traci Frey Lauren Afflitto Wanda Sheehan Danielle Glinski n/a Kayla Le Ariel Duenyas n/a District Information Kathy Pelles Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Room 508, Brooklyn, NY 11201 krehfield@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5102 Phone Number: 718-923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity Group Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 718-935-5941 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Traci Frey Lauren Afflitto Wanda Sheehan Kayla Le Ariel Duenyas *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Anthony Carannante CSA Representative TBD TBD TBD Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Danielle Glinski Heather Seltzberg Eric Feliciano Member/Parent Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Gaynor McCown EL High School is a small, safe, academically rigorous learning community that prepares students for success in college and other post-secondary options. We provide a nurturing learning community, supported by peaceful problem solving, students' respect for scholastic excellence, a building of character, and creativity. For the past 10 years, McCown has been guided by the Core Practices of EL Education (EL) and its relationship with New York City Outward Bound Schools.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Utilizing the EL Education model, staff uses a standards-based, interdisciplinary approach. Academic success with an emphasis on teamwork, service and character development, are key components of the McCown school culture. The curriculum is organized around Learning Expeditions and Case Studies; in-depth studies through which students investigate compelling issues and questions from different perspectives. Students engage in field work outside the classroom and learn from experts in their fields of study. Students create high quality products that demonstrate what they have learned in their Expeditions and often share these products with real audiences outside the classroom setting. Character and academics are emphasized. Students meet in daily Crews with advisors to learn how to work together as a team, set and meet academic goals, develop work habits, prepare for college, and engage in adventure/fitness. Students are taught to take responsibility for their own learning. Staff uses active teaching methods – modeling and demonstrations, hands on projects, small group work, and independent practice. Our lead partner is New York City Outward Bound Schools (NYCOBS), which brings expertise and the educational philosophy of its Expeditionary Learning approach. Outward Bound provides a national network that supports teachers, challenges students to do their best work while bringing a sense of adventure and discovery. Real world issues and concerns are connected to learning for students. Character development, teamwork and the development of academic skills necessary for college and beyond are critical to the work of New York City Outward Bound Schools. Each year, our school develops a Work Plan (with support of NYCOBS) that identifies three - four key areas of focus for our work. This plan is informed by the DOE’s Framework for Great Schools, as well as the school’s CEP. The Work Plan names targeted student achievement outcomes, teacher outcomes, and the school structures, supports, and actions to help us to achieve our goals. The plan also asks for data and evidence for us to monitor and reflect on progress towards goals. This Work Plan provides a road map for our Cabinet to then devise a professional development plan, which is the foundation for developing a shared understanding of effective instruction, aligned to the Danielson Framework. We believe that (as aligned with EL Core Practices): ● the curriculum (case study, Learning Expedition) compels students to produce high-quality work ● creating real work for authentic audiences motivates students to meet standards and engage in revision (one of our Habits of Work and Learning (HOWLs)) ● lesson planning begins with naming clear learning targets, which articulate specific learning goals in student-friendly language that can be assessed within the lesson ● teachers employ strategies to ignite student curiosity and track student understanding, and they maximize opportunities for student voice, critical thinking, and leadership ● instructional practices promote equity and high expectations ● lessons foster character by inspiring each student to develop craftsmanship, perseverance, collaborative skills, and responsibility for learning (another of our HOWLs) 0  ● lessons promote critical thinking by asking that students make connections, perceive patterns and relationships, understand diverse perspectives, supply evidence for inferences and conclusions, and generalize to the big ideas of the discipline studied ● lesson include checking the understanding of students during and at the end of lessons 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Approximately 30% of McCown students have IEPs (the borough average is approximately 13%); we have 15 one-to-one paraprofessionals on staff (for health, mobility, and crisis), multiple sections of ICT on a grade, and four cohorts of 15:1 self contained classes for grades 9-12, with an enrollment of only 430 students. Students' disabilities include autism, ADHD, emotionally disturbed, hearing impaired, speech impaired, learning disabled, and other health impairments. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools that we have made the most progress during the 2017-18 school year have been in Rigorous Instruction and in Collaborative Teachers. Those areas will continue to be the areas of focus during the 2018-19 school year. Three areas of focus that set us apart are: Intensives – For one week, we reorganize school to offer Intensives, elective courses that are a feature of EL Education schools. Students are immersed in a selected course that is not offered in a traditional curriculum. The Intensive allows students to focus on a particular topic, to become experts and to present their newly found knowledge to an authentic audience at the conclusion of the week. Students receive elective credit for the course. Intensives have included: Cookies For a Cause, Physics of Judo, Student News Network, 20 th Century Fashion,Rock of Ages, Feminism and Pop Culture, Get Fit, Adventure, Collegebound!, Taste of New York, and Farm to Table. Day of Service and other Service Learning Opportunities — Students need to complete a minimum of 100 hours of community service prior to graduation. Many of our students exceed this number. In honor of Gaynor McCown’s memory, we hold an annual Day of Service, in which students select from a menu of service activities and go out into the community participating in beach and park clean ups, working in soup kitchens, restocking food pantries, beautifying our school grounds, as well as other opportunities. We raised awareness and money for two diseases that affect members of the Staten Island community -- cystic fibrosis and stomach cancer. Service Learning is also part of every Expedition. CARA partnership for College Readiness – (college march, Alumni Day, to and through College) Our College Advisor works in collaboration with NYCOBS, enabling our students to receive additional counseling and check in support from external partners who are an intricate part of our school community, including being housed permanently in our school and attending our guidance meetings. Through the “To and Through College” initiative with NYCOBS, during the summer after senior year, a former McCown student will work closely with each of our graduates to bridge the gap between high school graduation and college matriculation. McCown alumni return regularly to the school to seek out continued support from our College Office and to perform service in our school community, as coaches and role models. 1  2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R064 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 439 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 7 7 1 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 35 39 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 45.0% % Attendance Rate 36.4% % Reduced Lunch 0.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 22.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 65.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.25 3% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 98% 90% 91.3% 7.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A NO N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A NO N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES N/A YES No N/A 113 104 90.5% 8.7% 25.5% 7.7% 2.7% 2.3% 2 3% 4 N/A N/A 87% 97% 89.9% 13% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2017-2018 Quality Review, the reviewer noted that "although work products reflect high levels of thinking and participation, student ownership has yet to be present across the vast majority of classes." In the 2017-18 School Survey, only 53% of students say that they are challenged in their classes. These noticings will be the focus on our work in the 2018-19 year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students will produce at least four products, one in each core content area, that meet the criteria outlined in EL Education''s Dimensions of Student Achievement and Attributes of High Quality Work, in alignment with Common Core Learning Standards which will result in a 5% increase in the number of students that say they are challenged in their classes as measured by the NYC School Survey. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development sessions (held every Friday from 1:15-2:35) for teachers on: teachers ● How to design a rigorous task ● Defining rigor in terms of the attributes of high quality work (What does it look like?) ● Evidence of the writing process and revision (drafts with final product) September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Guide, School Designer ● How to give descriptive/actionable feedback Professional Development sessions for teachers (held every Friday from 1:15-2:35) on the components of a Learning Expedition: teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Guide, School Designer ● Learning targets, guiding question, kickoff experience projects, lessons with differentiation, fieldwork, experts, service-learning, and a culminating event. ● Incorporating reading, writing, speaking, listening, numeracy, research, and problem-solving into the Expedition . ● Supporting all students (ELLs, SWDs) students in producing a quality product, shared with an authentic audience that includes a common core aligned product. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September, we will be holding a workshop series for parents, giving them the opportunity to attend at least four during the course of the evening. Topics will include Pupil Path, Crew, College 101, Common Core Math, Day of Service, Intensives, Using Social Media Responsibly, among other things. The Parent Coordinator will also be running parent workshops throughout the year that follow up on these topics. 5  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Department and Grade Team Leaders, Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Guide, and School Designer. 2. Protocols will be provided to teams by Administration, Instructional Guide, or School Designer for use when looking at student work and providing descriptive feedback. 3. Protocols will be provided to teams by Administration, Instructional Guide, or School Designer for use when peer reviewing colleagues’ lesson plans and unit plans. 4. Per session will be paid to Department, Grade Team Leaders, and Instructional Guide to meet for one hour per week in Cabinet. 5. Teachers will engage in common planning, Department Team meetings and Grade Team meetings weekly. 6. Whole staff meets in weekly PD on Friday from 1:15 – 2:35 pm with focus on instructional strategies based on the Danielson Rubric, Dimensions of Student Achievement, Indicators of Deeper Instruction and Attributes of High Quality Work, as well as the sharing of best practices. 7. Cabinet meets weekly from 2:35-3:35 pm for modeling of protocols and teacher leader capacity professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Notes from quality work protocol ● Rubrics creation ● Evidence of Peer Critique, teacher actionable feedback ● Feedback from teachers ● Curriculum Maps ● Teacher observation reports evidence A review of this evidence, using the IR Tool Rubric and the Work Plan, will take place in January 2019 at the Mid-Year Huddle meeting, that will include the School Designer, IG, Assistant Principal, and Principal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 6  Advance MOTP reports indicating teacher ratings in Designing Coherent Instruction, Engaging Students in Learning, Questioning and Discussion, and Use of Assessment in Instruction. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In 2017-18, 24 of the overall 59 incidents (41%) were Level 3 infractions, up from 2016-17, in which 11 of the overall 53 incidents (21%) were Level 3 infractions. We hold an annual "Positivity Week," in which students prepare presentations about the effects of bullying, sponsor an "It Gets Better" campaign, and sponsor an "Underneath it All" dress down day. In the most recent Learning Environment survey, 86% of students feel safe in the building, which leaves room for improvement. Whereas we speak with students about cyber-bullying, drug awareness, and appropriate speech, it is clear that more needs to be done, including bringing in representatives from the District Attorney's Office and the Tackling Youth Substance Abuse Initiative to speak with students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will incorporate Restorative Practices and Peer Mediation to foster and establish a caring, responsible environment to see a 3% reduction of Level 3infractions. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Send staff over the summer and during the Fall Term to TCIS professional development sponsored by the Staten Island Borough Support Center. Teachers, paraprofessionals July 2018-June 2019 Put together a Discipline Committee and Peer Mediation Team to develop a more effective system of restorative practice to hold students more accountable for their actions. September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, guidance counselors, Dean, Assistant Principal, Principal Invite parents and students to cyber-bullying and substance abuse workshops sponsored by the Richmond County District Attorney’s Office, Tackling Youth Substance Abuse organization, and the YMCA. Parents, students September 2018-June 2019 Intervisitation at other schools implementing Restorative Practices to meet with staff involved in the development of the practices and to observe Restorative Circles in action. Teachers, Dean, Guidance Counselors, Assistant Principal September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Dean, Guidance Counselors Principal, Assistant Principal, Dean Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Assistant Principal, Principal Principal, Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In September, we will be holding a workshop series for parents. Topics will include Using Social Media Responsibly, among other things. The Parent Coordinator will also be running parent workshops throughout the year that follow up on these topics. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 9  ● Per Session for the Discipline Committee to meet after school ● Per diem to cover staff TCIS training and intervisitation at other schools already implementing Restorative Practices Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Number of staff sent to TCIS trainng ● Number of staff sent to intervisit at other schools ● Number of Restorative Circles conducted Number of Peer Mediation sessions held Number of Level 3 infractions committed A review of this evidence, using the IR Tool Rubric and the Work Plan, will take place in January 2019 at the Mid-Year Huddle meeting, that will include the School Designer, IG, Assistant Principal, and Principal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS Incident Level and Infraction Summary report, per diem coverage information Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Although Crew at McCown has improved since the school's inception , more work needs to be done to create vertical skills alignment. There is still variability across classrooms and grade levels; some Crews exhibit strong structures and planning (clear documentation), while others (based on walk-through observations) exhibit fewer clear EL Education structures and practices. We also see a need to continue our “reinvigoration” of Crew, meaning to intentionally support McCown staff in embracing Crew as a meaningful opportunity for students’ learning and social-emotional growth. Although significant progress has been made in achieving horizontal alignment, and the Implementation Review rubric indicates a “4” in Crew, we perceive the need to meet a higher bar - one that emphasizes a) clear Crew planning across grade levels, b) consistency of shared Crew structures and practices, and c) increased student engagement. For us, this starts at the staff level and then transfers from staff to student Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all Crew teachers will craft vertically aligned crew curriculum, that is peer reviewed and revised, that improves students’ social and emotional learning and academic success resulting in a 5% increase in students responses on the NYC School Survey that they feel supported by teachers when they feel upset. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will create vertically aligned Crew maps, using the already created curriculum maps for guidance during dedicated Crew Team and common planning time. Teachers, Crew Team Leaders September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Guide, School Designer, Assistant Principal, Principal Teachers, Crew Team Leaders September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Crew Team Leaders September 2018-June 2019 Crew Team Leaders September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Guide, School Designer, Assistant Principal, Principal Instructional Guide, School Designer, Assistant Principal, Principal Instructional Guide, School Designer, Assistant Principal, Principal Professional development sessions will be designed to prepare Crew Advisors to support students and empower them to lead crew, releasing responsibility. Professional development sessions will be designed to assist Crew Advisors in supporting the social and emotional and development Crew Team Leaders will continue to intervisit with other NYCOBS schools to share best practices around Crew. The School Designer will support this work and share resources with the Team Leaders, as well. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September, we will be holding a workshop series for parents. Topics will include Pupil Path, Crew, College 101, Common Core Math, Day of Service, Intensives, Using Social Media Responsibly, among other things. The Parent Coordinator will also be running parent workshops throughout the year that follow up on these topics. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Per Diem for Crew Team Leaders to intervisit at other EL schools ● Per Diem for Crew Team Leaders to continue their mapping efforts begun in the 2016-17 school year ● Per Session for cabinet meetings that are held weekly ● FSF funds to purchase supplies ● Common Planning during Circular 6 time for Crew teams to meet as well as cooperating teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Crew vertical plans – Curriculum maps, unit plans, lesson plans ● Student survey data ● Implementation Review scores A review of this evidence, using the IR Tool Rubric and the Work Plan, will take place in January 2018 at the Mid-Year Huddle meeting, that will include the School Designer, IG, Assistant Principal, and Principal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Learning Environment Survey, Implementation Review scores, Crew maps Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2017-18 Quality Review, the reviewer indicated that although "across classrooms, assessment practices result in adjustments to curricula and instruction to address students’ diverse learning needs," we were rated Proficient. We did a lot of work around interpersonal skills development with the department teams; now, in the 2018-19 school year, we need to continue our work in engaging in deeper inquiry work at the team level. Teams will analyze item analysis data from past Regents exams, see in which skills students are lacking, develop an action plan, test it, and revisit the work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will engage in at least four cycles of inquiry work at the department team level, by analyzing item analysis data from the January and June 2018 Regents Exams, designing an inquiry question, creating an action plan, implementing the plan, and then analyzing student achievement results, which will result in a 5% increase in students' passing rates on the Algebra 1 Regents Exam. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Support Department Team Leaders in supporting and leading inquiry work, analyzing data, and facilitating team meetings Department Team leaders Engage Cabinet members in planning and implementing weekly professional development sessions. Department Team leaders Engage in inquiry work at the Department team level; identifying an inquiry question, researching strategies, implementing those strategies, looking at student work, analyzing the effectiveness of the strategies. teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Guide, School Designer, Assistant Principal, Principal Instructional Guide, School Designer, Assistant Principal, Principal Assistant Principal, Principal, Department Team Leaders How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September, we will be holding a workshop series for parents. Topics will include Pupil Path, Crew, College 101, Common Core Math, Day of Service, Intensives, Using Social Media Responsibly, among other things. The Parent Coordinator will also be running parent workshops throughout the year that follow up on these topics. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Per session for Cabinet meetings for one hour every week ● Protocols will be provided to teams by Administration or School Designer for use when looking at student work ● Protocols will be provided to teams by Administration or School Designer for use when engaging in inquiry ● Scheduled time during teacher programs for Department and Crew Team meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 5  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Department Team minutes Department share out in whole staff PD periodically throughout the year Cabinet minutes A review of this evidence, using the IR Tool Rubric and the Work Plan, will take place in January 2019 at the Mid-Year Huddle meeting, that will include the School Designer, IG, Assistant Principal, and Principal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Inquiry Cycle Portfolios provided by Department Team Leaders that has evidence of student work, use of a LASW protocol, action plans based on the data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The average attendance at monthly PTA meetings is 10-12 people. In the Learning Environment Survey, parents are satisfied with the education their children are receiving, the attentiveness of the staff, and the safety of their children. During the 2017-18 school year, the PTA tried to incorporate guest speakers, college guidance workshops, celebrating the Students of the Month, drug awareness workshops, and other events to attract parents to its meetings, but many parents still do not attend. Although these meetings are advertised via daily announcements, flyers, email, School Messenger, the school’s website and Facebook pages, the outreach does not have the intended effect of increasing parental engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent attendance at PTA meetings will increase by 10%. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Hold differentiated, age appropriate workshops (grade specific), including family game night, club/sports team awareness night, bimonthly or monthly awards night Parents September 2018-June 2019 Survey parents to see if the current day (Wednesday evenings) that meetings are held is the most convenient one for parents Parents September 2018-June 2019 PTA Executive Board, Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal, Principal PTA Executive Board, Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal, Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. HESC of NYS, NYC Outward Bound Schools, ACCES-VR, College of Staten Island, Staten Island University Hospital, FDNY Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator’s time Funds to pay for speakers, if needed, from the PTA Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 8  Attendance records from PTA meetings Survey results mid year and end year A review of this evidence, using the IR Tool Rubric and the Work Plan, will take place in January 2019 at the Mid-Year Huddle meeting, that will include the School Designer, IG, Assistant Principal, and Principal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PTA minutes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) PL scores, Regents scores, course grades PL scores, Regents scores, course grades Regents scores, course grades Regents scores, course grades IEP, guidance counselor request Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Homework assistance, guided reading, essay writing strategies Homework assistance, problem solving strategies Homework assistance, problem solving strategies Homework assistance, essay writing strategies Mandated counseling, crisis counseling Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one-on-one tutoring During and after school Small group, one-on-one tutoring During and after school Small group, one-on-one tutoring During and after school Small group, one-on-one tutoring During and after school Small group, one-on-one counseling During school 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1 We will provide basic emergency supplies (uniforms, school supplies, books, etc.) and other educational services, like at-risk counseling and tutoring, so that STH students have opportunities to progress academically. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $199 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 3  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 4  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy n/a Non title 1 n/a Non title 1 n/a Non title 1 n/a Non title 1 n/a Non title 1 n/a Non title 1 n/a Non title 1 n/a Non title 1 Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parental Involvement and School Quality Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement School-Parent Compact (SPC) I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 6  n/a Non title 1 n/a Non title 1 n/a Non title 1 II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name Gaynor McCown EL School Borough Staten Island School Number 064 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Traci Frey Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Joseph Errichiello Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Kathy Pelles Assistant Principal David Cugini Coach type here School Counselor Tiffany Reingold Parent Kelly Bracero Parent Coordinator Diana Leon-Gonzalez Field Support Center Staff Member Jocelyn Santos Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 430 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.47% 8  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teachers use Interim Assessments to assess the literacy skills of all of our students. The ENL teacher administers mock NYSESLAT exams to gauge progress, and we also administer the ELL Periodic Assessments. Data indicates that writing is the area that most needs focus. Teachers have incorporated a culture of revision in classes, especially in ELA and social studies, providing students with the opportunity to revise essays based on descriptive feedback. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? will add 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The students participating in the ENL program are improving in their NYSESLAT scores on each of the modalities. 9  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? will add 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Across all grades, students showed the highest scores in the listening and speaking modalities of the NYSESLAT. Their reading scores showed a variation among individual students. Both students show the highest need for the development of writing proficiency. The teachers on the grade team of these students are informed of the areas by the ENL teacher working with these students. These students need assistance so that instruction can be tailored to meet their needs. Both students will be referred to an after school ELA class to enhance their writing skills. Writing workshops which focus on teaching the writing process are offered to the long term ELLs who have demonstrated deficiency in writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? will add Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are enrolled in an ungraded ENL class that is heterogeneously grouped. Given that currently there are only 2 students being served, this is the best use of our resources. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The Gaynor McCown Expeditionary Learning School’s schedule allots 250 minutes of instructional time each week for each period of the school day. This is above the required number of minutes by New York State. We provide 360 minutes of ENL instruction (5 periods per week/50 minutes per day in addition to extended day after school) and 250 minutes of stand-alone ELA instruction (5 days per week/50 minutes per day) to all students who score Emerging on the NYSESLAT exam, and 180 minutes of ENL instruction and 250 minutes of stand-alone ELA instruction to all students who score Transitioning or Expanding on the NYSESLAT exam. Every teacher at McCown, regardless of subject taught, is responsible for teaching reading and writing across the curriculum. 0  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area class instruction is delivered in English, using approaches like interactive word walls and vocabulary focus, which accelerate English language acquisition. Teachers ask students to annotate articles and reading for understanding to enable students to more easily find evidence to support their answers, English classes practice the 6+1 Writing protocol, and a vocabulary "word of the week" is announced over the loudspeaker every day, providing the pronunciation, definition and use in a pointing sentence. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL students are assessed using the ELL Periodic Assessment exam. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Currently, there are no SIFE students at McCown. All McCown teachers practice active pedagogy strategies using Fisher and Frey's Gradual Release of Responsibility model. The EL Education model focuses on inquiry based, hands on learning that encourages students to be an active participant in their learning. Teachers will often scaffold learning for the different learning levels in their classes, and will differentiate reading materials to acknowledge the different needs of their students, including English Language Learners. The ENL teacher provides scaffolded resources for academic vocabulary and grammar to all ELLs depending on whether they are newcomers or those receiving service for 4 - 6 years. Long term ELLs are supported with tutorial sessions and regents preparation classes. Former ELLs are still eligible for testing accommodations in year 1 after testing Commanding, and are entitled to 90 minutes per week of ENL instruction and are afforded the same opportunities for tutorial sessions and regents preparation classes. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use close reading, graphic organizers, leveled reading, Cornell note taking, and Frayer model organizers, among other strategies. Each classroom has an interactive white board as well as a document camera. The ENL teacher is also a certified Special Education teacher, so he often infuses modification strategies that assist not only the SWD ELLs but also the general education ELLs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All SWDs are provided with services in the least restrictive, flexible programming possible after evaluation by the School Assessment Team. Any ELL SWD will receive support not only in his or her ENL class but also in content area classes if they are in an ICT class or in their SETSS class., as well as in elective classes where they are integrated with their non-disabled peers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The following intervention programs are offered for ELLs: Regents preparation courses, during and after-school tutoring, including tutoring performed by the Principal, Regents exams provided in two languages (when available), and bilingual glossaries are provided to students for use on Regents exams. All of the intervention services are offered in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The ENL teacher has planned fieldwork opportunities for the two remaining students in the program. 1  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All school programs, including after school sports, theater productions, and clubs, as well as tutoring and Regents review, are available for ELL students to participate. Announcements about school events are made on a daily basis over the loudspeaker, are included in the Parent Newsletter, are distributed by the PTA, and are on the school's website and Facebook page. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Textbooks, bilingual glossaries, and workbooks are used to support ELLs in their native language, as are the online resources available at oedb.org. Moreover, teachers frequently use graphic organizers, the Frayer model, Cornell notetaking method, as well as other pedagogical strategies to help ELLs, ELL SWDs and all other students. Each classroom has a Starboard connected to an iMac, as well as a document camera, and two desktop computers and printer for student use. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Bilingual glossaries, as well as online resources are made available for the various content areas. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required service support and resources are age and grade appropriate. Instruction is scaffolded and differentiated, and students have access to the same textbooks. Service support and resources correspond to the levels identified through the NYSESLAT exam, as well as course requirements. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Textbooks, bilingual glossaries, and workbooks are used to support ELLs in their native language, as are the online resources available at oedb.org. Moreover, teachers frequently use graphic organizers, the Frayer model, Cornell notetaking method, as well as other pedagogical strategies to help ELLs, ELL SWDs and all other students. Each classroom has a Starboard connected to an iMac, as well as a document camera, and two desktop computers and printer for student use. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). If we encounter ELLs in the entering class, we will, at the beginning of the school year, hold a new parent orientation session the first week of school in the evening with translation services available. Students will also be enrolled in extended day programs to augment classroom instruction, and introduced to other students in the building who speak the same native language, if available. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs are offered the following language course: Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Weekly grade team and department team meetings are held, as are weekly professional development time (every Friday from 1:15-2:35 pm) in which staff (teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance staff) meet with colleagues to look at student work, establish congruence in various classes, share best practices, and focus on differentiation in the classroom as well as the Gradual Release of Responsibility model of lesson planning and implementation. The Affinity Group Support Center's ELL specialist will also provide teachers with professional development about ENL strategies. The ENL teacher had attended Network sponsored professional development workshops, as well as workshops at Fordham University, and will continue to do so through the Affinity Group Support Center. This LAP document will also be posted on the Professional Development page of the private community section of the school's website for teachers to refer. All ELLs are provided with assistance as they prepare to make the transition from high school to college. The College Advisor, as well as their Crew Advisor, works with them on college choice and possible majors/career paths to pursue. Guidance staff attend PD offered by the DOE offices related to servicing ELLs; the Principal and Assistant Principal incorporate ELL strategies into all aspects of active pedagogy conversations during the observation process and when facilitating professional development sessions. As the school year begins new teachers to the school are scheduled to meet with the principal to introduce the school programs and review strategies for working with ELLs. The Affinity Group Support Center's ELL specialist will be invited to provide Jose P. training to all staff twice this year, with a focus on vocabulary, and on scaffolding. The Principal will maintain a running record of the number of training hours each teacher receives, and provide teachers with a certificate of completion. As described in question 1, all teachers engage in weekly professional development. One of the work plan goals is the creation of rigorous, Common core aligned products. The expectation for all lessons and units are that they are Common Core aligned. Teachers engage in peer review of assessments, lesson and unit plans; administrators review lesson plans regularly as part of the observation process. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All students have Crew, an advisory class, that focuses on social emotional growth, organization skills, study skills, and time management skills, in addition to academic support. Part of the 9 th Grade Crew Curriculum concentrates on the transition from middle school to high school. As referred to in the ELL Policy and Reference Guide, a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CRPart 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. This is accomplished through the sharing of best practices by teachers leading PD. Many of the strategies that are successful for SWD are also applicable to ELL students. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. The ENL teacher participates in both department team PD and whole staff PD, as well as in PD offered by the Affinity Group Support Center. The Instructional Guide keeps a record of the dates of PDs as well as the topics covered and distributes the list to staff every Spring. 3  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of ELLs are invited to meet with the ENL teacher and Guidance Counselor, along with the Parent Coordinator, to discuss the goals of the Freestanding ENL program, the child's progress, assessment results, and language development needs. If interpretation is needed, the DOE Language and Intrepretation hotline phone number is called. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Notices that are sent home with students are translated into different languages, the school's website has the ability to be translated into numerous languages at the click of a button, parents can sign on to PupilPath, an online grade reporting system that keeps parents up to date with their children's progress in class, and the Parent Coordinator sends out monthly newsletters notifying parents of upcoming school events and workshops. Workshops are offered on the following topics for parents, Adolescent Obesity and Eating Disorders in Teenagers, What Your Ninth Grader Needs to Know for College, Financial Aid for College, How to Deal with your Teenager, College Application Process, Organizational Skills for School Success and Preparing for the PSAT and SAT. AT all events translators are available to assist parents of ELLs with language challenges. Letters are sent home to parents informing them of the availability of translators. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Traci Frey, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Gaynor McCown EL School School DBN: 31R064 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Traci Frey Title Principal David Cugini Assistant Principal Diana Leon-Gonzalez Parent Coordinator Joseph Errichiello ENL/Bilingual Teacher Kelly Bracero Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Tiffany Reingold School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/9/15 9/9/15 9/9/15 9/9/15 9/9/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 9/9/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R064 School Name: Gaynor McCown EL School Superintendent: Kathy Pelles The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. a. Students new to the school and to the country complete HLIS form to determine home language. b. Preview PCL (Pupil Candidate List) to determine ENL students of the incoming 9th grade students. c. ATS reports that tell # of years of ELL service to students. (Beginners, Intermediate, Advanced or Beginner, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, Commanding) Determine which students may have developed English fluency and can therefore translate. d. Interview students and parents to survey translation needs in orientation. 7  e. The Parent Coordinator asks every family to fill out a survey at the beginning of each school year, including languages spoken at home; blue emergency cards are consulted before families are called to determine if translation services are needed; ATS is also used to track language spoken at home. f. In addition to English, letters and information are translated into Spanish, Korean, Russian, French, Hebrew, Chinese and Arabic. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language English, Spanish, Korean, Russian, French, Hebrew, Chinese, and Arabic. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School lunch forms, uniform policy, fieldwork memo, invitations to student led conferences, tutoring schedules, Regents Exam schedules, monthly parent newsletters from the Parent Coordinator. These are distributed on an as-needed basis throughout the school year. Information that is posted on the school's website and calendar can be translated into multiple languages directly on the website. 8  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? During the year, in addition to monthly PTA meetings, parents are invited to Back to School night in September, Parent Teacher Conferences in November and March, student led conferences in January and May, as well as a Parent Breakfast in February, at which time the Principal, Parent Coordinator, and Guidance Counselors make a presentation. Financial Aid night and CUNY application day, as well as the College March, are other events that parents are invited. Calls are also placed by the school aides, Parent Coordinator, the Dean, Assistant Principal, Principal, Guidance Counselors, and teachers (during parent engagement time) regarding student performance and behavior. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 9  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) • Provide translation services via DOE Translation Services for written materials, as well as distribute pre-translated documents (Parents' Bill of Rights, school lunch forms, notices from the Chancellor's Office, etc). • Provide translations via staff and student volunteers • Post signs in various languages in school where applicable. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Parent Coordinator surveys parents at the end of each Student Led Conference. 0 
